INVOCATION 
“Obeisance to you, O Tulasidasa! Please come here, O saint of holy vows. 
Taking your seat in the south-west, accept this adoration. Obeisance to Tulasidasa.” 
“Obeisance to you, O Valmiki ! Pray come here, O bestower of blessings ! Take 
your seat in the north-east and accept my homage. Obeisance to Valmiki.” 
“Obeisance to You, O Spouse of Gauri (Parvati) ! Pray come here, O mighty Lord. 
Kindly take Your seat in the south-east and accept my homage. Obeisance to the 
Spouse of Gauri.” 
“Obeisance to you, O Laksmana; please come here with your beloved consort 
(Urmila). Kindly occupy the southern quarter of the altar, and accept my homage. 
Obeisance to Laksmana with his consort.” 
“Obeisance to you, O Satrughna ! Please come here with your beloved consort 
(Srutakirti). Seating yourself in the western quarter of this altar pray accept my homage. 
Obeisance to Satrughna with his consort.” 
“Obeisance to you, O Bharata! Pray come here with your beloved consort 
(Mandavi), Please sit down in the northern quarter of the altar and accept my homage. 
Obeisance to Bharata and his wife.” 
“Obeisance to you, O Hanuman! Pray come here, O mine of compassion. 
Please occupy the eastern quarter and accept my homage, O Lord! Obeisance to 
Hanuman.” 
The principal deity (Sri Rama accompanied by His Consort, Sita) should then be 
worshipped with due ceremony. Taking flowers in the hollow of his or her palms the 
reader should meditate on the Supreme Deity (Sri Rama) in the light of the following 
verse: — 
“I ever adore Sri Rama, whose charming eyes resemble the petals of a red lotus, 
who is clad in yellow raiments and has a dark-brown form endowed with a pair of arms, 
who wears a cheerful countenance, is accompanied by Sri Sita, and is an ocean of 
nectar in the form of mercy, who is waited upon even by Visnu, Siva and others and is 
meditated upon alongwith His three brothers and other favourite attendants (Hanuman 
and others) and who grants the desire of His devotees.” 
“Please come, O Lord of Janaka’s Daughter, alongwith Sita and accept my 
homage with Hanuman (son of the wind-god) and others, O Scion of Raghu.” 
“Occupy, O Rama, this bejewelled seat of gold, offered by me, and spread over 
with an exquisite covering.” 
The Deity should then be worshipped with the sixteenfold equipage prescribed in 
the scriptures.* 
“Of this story of Sri Rama, known by the name of “Manasa-Ramayana,” Lord Siva, 
the sages Kakabhusundi and Yajnavalkya and Gosvami Tulasidasa are the seers; Sri 
Rama united with His Consort, Sita, is the deity; the name ‘Rama’ is the seed; Devotion 
which cures the disease of transmigration, is the Sakti (motive force or energy); and the 
object of this reading is to ward off all evils and accomplish all one’s desires through the 
propitiation of Sita and Rama.” 

(The Manasa lake containing the exploits of Sri Rama) 

Descent One 

(Bala-Kanda) 
Chapter 1
I reverence Van! ( the goddess of speech) and Vinayaka (Lord Ganesa), the 
originators of sounds represented by the alphabet, of the multitudes of objects denoted by those 
sounds, of poetic sentiments as well as of metres, and the begetters of all auspiciainess. (1 ) 
I greet Goddess Parvati and Her consort, Bhagavan Sankara, embodiments of 
reverence and faith respectively, without which even the adept cannot perceive God 
enshrined in their very heart. (2) 
I make obeisance to the eternal preceptor in the form of Lord Sankara, who is all 
wisdom, and resting on whose brow the crescent moon, though crooked in shape, is 
universally adored. (3) 
I pay homage to the king of poes (ValmTki) and the chief of monkeys (Hanuman), 
of pure intelligence, both of whom sport in the holy woods in the shape of glories of Sita 
and Rama. (4) 
I bow to Sita the beloved consort of Sri Rama, who is responsible for the 
creation, sustenance and dissolution (of the universe), removes afflictions and begets 
all bleneshess. (5) 
I adore Lord Hari, known by the name of Sri Rama, who is superior to and 
lies beyond all causes, whose Maya (illusive power) holds sway over the entire 
universe including gods from Brahma (the Creator) downwards and demons, whose 
presence lends positive reality to the world of appearances — even as the false notion 
of a serpent is entertained with reference to a rope — and whose feet are the only 
bark for those who are eager to cross the ocean of mundane existence. (6) 
For the gratification of his own self Tulasidasa brings forth this very elegant 
composition relating in common parlance the story of the Lord of Raghus, which is in accord 
with the various Puranas, Vedas and the Agamas (Tantras), and incorporates what has 
been recorded in the Ramayana (of ValmTki) and culled from some other sources. (7) 
May Lord Ganesa, the leader of Siva’s retinue, whose very thought ensures 
success, who carries on his shoulders the head of a beautiful elephant, who is a 
repository of wisdom and an abode of blessed qualities, shower his grace. (1) 
May that merciful Lord, whose grace enables the dumb to wax eloquent and a 
cripple to ascend an inaccessible mountain, and who burns all the impurities of the Kali 
age, be moved to pity. (2) 
May the Lord who ever sleeps on the ocean of milk, and who is swarthy as a 
blue lotus and has eyes resembling a pair of full-blown red lotuses, take up His abode 
in my bosom. (3) 
May the crusher of Cupid, Bhagavan Siva, whose form resembles in colour the 
jasmine flower and the moon, who is the consort of Goddess Parvati and an abode of 
compassion and who is fond of the afflicted, be gracious. (4) 

Chapter 2
I bow to the lotus feet of my Guru, who is an ocean of mercy and is no other than 
Sri Hari Himself in human form, and whose words are sunbeams as it were for 
dispersing the mass of darkness in the form of gross ignorance. (5) 
I greet the pollen-like dust of the lotus feet of my preceptor, refulgent, fragrant and 
flavoured with love. It is a lovely powder of the life-giving herb, which allays the host of all 
the attendant ills of mundane existence. It adorns the body of a lucky person even as white 
ashes beautify the person of Lord Siva, and brings forth sweet blessings and joys. It rubs 
the dirt off the beautiful mirror in the shape of the devotee’s heart; when applied to the 
forehead in the form of a Tilaka (a religious mark), it attracts a host of virtues. The 
splendour of gems in the form of nails on the feet of the blessed Guru unfolds divine vision 
in the heart by its very thought. The lustre disperses the shades of infatuation, highly 
blessed is he in whose bosom it shines. With its very appearance the bright eyes of the 
mind get opened; the attendant evils and sufferings of the night of mundane existence 
disappear; and gems and rubies in the shape of stories of Sri Rama, both patent and 
hidden, wherever and in whatever mine they may be, come to light — (1 — 4) 
— as for instance, by applying to the eyes the miraculous salve known by the 
name of Siddhanjana (the eye-salve of perfection) strivers, adepts as well as men of 
wisdom easily discover a host of mines on hill-tops, in the midst of forests and in the 
bowels of the earth. (1) 
The dust of the Guru’s feet is a soft and agreeable, salve, which is ambrosia as 
it were for the eyes and remedies the defects of vision. Having brightened my eyes of 
discernment thereby I proceed to relate the story of Sri Rama, which secures freedom 
from the bondage of mundane existence. First I reverence the feet of Brahmanas, the 
very gods on earth, who are able to dispel all doubts born of ignorance. Then I make 
loving obeisance, in a polite language, to the whole body of pious souls, the mines of all 
virtues. The conduct of holy men is noble as the career of the cotton plant, the fruit 
whereof is tasteless, white and fibrous (even as the doings of saints yield results which 
are free from attachment, stainless and full of goodness).* Even by suffering hardships 
( in the form of ginning, spinning and weaving) the cotton covers others’ faults and has 
thereby earned in the world a renown which is worthy of adoration. The assemblage of 
saints, which is all joy and felicity, is a moving Prayaga (the king of all holy places) as 
it were. Devotion to Sri Rama represents, in this moving Prayaga, the stream of the holy 
Gariga, the river of the celestials; while the proceeding of an enquiry into the nature of 
Brahma (the Absolute) constitutes the Sarasvati (a subterranean stream which is 
traditionally believed to join the Gariga and the Yamuna at Prayaga, thus accounting for 
the name ‘Triveni’, which signifies a meeting-place of three rivers). Discourses on Karma 
or Action, consisting of injunctions and interdictions, have been spoken of as the sacred 
Yamuna — a daughter of the sun-god in her angelic form — washing the impurities of the 
Kali age; while the anecdotes of Visnu and Siva stand out as the triple stream known as 
Triveni, bringing joy and blessings to those who listen to them. Unwavering faith in their 
own creed constitutes the immortal banyan tree and noble actions represent the royal 
court of that king of holy places. Easy of access to all on anyday and at every place, 
this moving Prayaga assuages the afflictions of those who resort to it with reverence. 
This king of holy places is beyond all description and supra-mundane in character; it 
bestows the reward immediately and its glory is manifest. (1 — 7) 
* The fruit of the cotton plant has been characterized in the original as ‘Nirasa’, ‘Visada’ and 
‘Gunamaya’, which words can be interpreted both ways as in the rendering given above. 
Men who having heard the glory of this moving Prayaga in the form of the 
assemblage of holy men, appreciate it with an enraptured mind and then take a plunge 
into it with extreme devotion obtain the four rewards* of human existence during their 
very lifetime. (2) 
The result of dipping into the sacred waters of this king of holy places is instantly 
perceived: crows turn into cuckoos and herons into swans. Let no one marvel to hear 
this; the glory of contact with saints is no secret. Valmikit, Naradat and Agastya§, who 
was born of a pitcher, have related the story of their birth and transformation with their 
own lips. Of the various creatures, both animate and inanimate, living in this world, 
whether in water or on land or in the air, whoever has ever attained wisdom, glory, 
salvation, material prosperity or welfare anywhere and by any means whatsoever, know 


* The four rewards of human existence are: (1) Dharma or religious merit (2) Artha or material riches 
(3) Kama or sensuous enjoyment and (4) Moksa or release from the bondage of worldly existence. 

Valmiki had been a hunter and a highway robber in his early life. He was reclaimed by the seven 
seers and eventually turned out a great seer and poet. 

We read in the Bhagavata that Narada was the son of a maid-servant in his previous incarnation 
and even as a child came in touch with holy men, who imparted him the highest wisdom and made him a real 
devotee by their very contact. In his next birth he appeared as a mind-born son of Brahma. 

Chapter 3
Agastya was begotten of god Varuna through a pitcher. Another great sage, Vasistha, was also born of 
the same pitcher. The association thus obtained in his embryonic state with a great sage made him equally great. 
it to be the result of association with holy men; there is no other means either in the world 
or in the Vedas. Wisdom dawns not without association with saints and such association 
cannot be easily had without the grace of Sri Rama. Contact with noble souls is the root 
of joy and blessings; it constitutes the very fruit and fulfilment of all endeavours, whereas 
all other practices are blossoms as it were. Through contact with the virtuous even the 
wicked get reformed, just as a base metal is transmuted by the touch of the philosopher’s 
stone. On the other hand, if by mischance good men fall into evil company, they maintain 
their noble character like the gem on the hood of a serpent. Even the speech of deities 
like Brahma, Visnu and Siva, poets and men of wisdom falters in depicting the glory of 
pious souls. Much less can it be described by me, even as a dealer in vegetables finds 
himself incapable of expatiating on the qualities of gems. (1 — 6) 
I bow to the saints, who are even-minded towards all and have no friend or foe, 
just as a flower of good quality placed in the palm of one's hands communicates its 
fragrance alike to both the hands (the one which plucked it and that which held and 
preserved it). Realizing thus the noble disposition and loving nature of saints, who are 
innocent at heart and catholic in spirit, I make this humble submission to them. Listening 
to my childlike prayer and taking compassion on me, O noble souls, bless me with 
devotion to the feet of Sri Rama. (3 A-B) 

Chapter 4
Again, I greet with a sincere heart the malevolent class, who are hostile without 
purpose even to the friendly, to whom others’ loss is their own gain, and who delight 
in others’ desolation and wail over their prosperity. They try to eclipse the glory of 
Visnu and Siva even as the demon Rahu intercepts the light of the full moon (during 
what is known as the lunar eclipse); and they are valiant like the reputed king 
Sahasrabahu* (so-called because of his possessing a thousand arms) in working 
others’ woe. They detect others’ faults as if with a thousand eyes and their (designing) 
mind mars others’ interests even as a fly spoils clarified butter. In splendour they 
emulate the god of fire and in anger they vie with the god of death, who rides a buffalo. 
They are rich in crime and vice as Kubera, the god of riches, is in gold. Like the rise 
of a comet their advancement augurs ill for others’ interests; like the slumber of 
Kumbhakarnaf their decline alone is propitious for the world. They lay down their very 
life in order to be able to harm others, even as hail-stones dissolve after destroying the 
crop. I reverence a wicked soul as the fiery (thousand-tongued) serpent-god Sesa, in 
so far as he eagerly expatiates on others’ faults with a thousand tongues as it were. 
Again, I bow to him as the celebrated king Prthu (who prayed for ten thousand ears 
in order to be able to hear the glories of the Lord to his heart’s content) inasmuch as 
he hears of others’ faults with ten thousand ears as it were. Once more do I supplicate 
to him as Indra (the lord of celestials) in so far as wine appears charming and beneficial 
to him (even as the army of gods is beneficent to Indra ). $ Harsh language is dear to 
him even as the thunderbolt is fondly cherished by Indra; and he detects others’ faults 
with one thousand eyes as it were. (1 — 6) 
The wicked burn with jealousy as they hear of others’ welfare, be they his friends, 
foes or neutrals: such is their wont. Knowing thus, this humble soul makes loving 
entreaties to them with joined palms. (4) 
I for my part have made entreaties to them; they too must not fail to do their part. 
However fondly you may nurture a brood of crows, can you ever expect ravens to turn 
non carvivoaus I adore the feet of saint and wicked soul both of whom give pain, 
though some difference is said to exist between them. Whereas the former class cause 
mortal pain while parting, the latter give agonizing torment during their meeting. Though 
born together in the world, they differ in their traits even as the lotus and the leech 
(both of which spring from water). The good and the wicked resemble nectar and 
wine respectively; the unfathomable ocean in the form of this world is their common 
parent.* The good and the wicked gather a rich harvest of good reputation and infamy 
by their respective doings. Although the merits of nectar, the moon — the seat of nectar — 
the Gariga — the river of the celestials — and a pious soul, on the one hand, and the 
demerits of venom, fire, the unholy river Karmanasa — which is said to be full of the 
impurities of the Kali age — and the hunter, on the other, are known to all, only that which 
is to a man’s taste appears good to him. (1 — 5) 
* In the Puranas we read how both nectar and wine were churned out of the ocean of milk, by the joint 
efforts of the gods and the demons. 
Of course, a good man has a bias for goodness alone, while a vile person is prone 
to vileness. While nectar is praised for its immortalizing virtue, poison is extolled for its 
deadly effects. (5) 

Chapter 5
The tales of sins and vices of the wicked, on the one hand, and of the virtues of the 
virtuous, on the other, are like boundless and unfathomable oceans. That is why I have 
enumerated only a few virtues and vices; for they cannot be acquired or discarded without 
being duly distinguished. The good as well as the vile, all have been brought into being by 
the Creator; it is the Vedas that have differentiated them by reckoning the merits of the 
former class and the demerits of the other. The Vedas, the Itihasas (such as the Ramayana 
and the Mahabharata) and the Puranas unanimously declare that the creation of Brahma 
(the Creator) is an intermixture of good and evil. It is characterized by pairs of opposites 
such as pain and pleasure, sin and merit, day and night, the good and the wicked, good 
birth and vile birth, demons and gods, the high and the low, nectar and poison, a happy life 
and death, Maya and Brahma, i.e., Matter and Spirit, the soul and God (the Lord of the 
universe), plenty and poverty, the pauper and the king, the sacred KasT or Varanasi and 
Magadha or North Bihar (the accursed land), the holy Gariga the river of the celestials — 
and the unholy Karmanasa* (in Bihar), the desert land of Maravara (Western Rajaputana 
and Sindha) and the rich soil of Malava, the Brahmana — who is a veritable god on earth — 
and the barbarian who feeds on the cow, heaven and hell, attachment and dispassion. The 
Vedas and other sacred books have sifted good from evil. (1 — 5) 
* A river of sinful origin in Bihar, a plunge in whose waters is said to destroy one’s religious merits. 
Hence it is called Karmanasa (that which neutralizes one’s meritorious acts). 
God has created the universe consisting of animate and inanimate beings as 
partaking of both good and evil; swans* in the form of saints imbibe the milk of goodness 
rejecting water in the form of evil. (6) 
When Providence blesses one with such discrimination (as is possessed by the 
swan), then alone does the mind abandon evil and gets enamoured of goodness. By 
force of the spirit of the times, old habits and past Karma even the good deviate from 
goodness under the influence of Maya. But just as servants of Sri Hari rectify that error 
and, eradicating sorrow and weakness, bring untarnished glory to them, even so the 

* The swan is traditionally believed to feed on pearls and credited with the natural gift of separating 
milk from water. 
wicked occasionally perform a noble deed due to their good association, although their 
evil nature, which is unchangeable, cannot be obliterated. Even those who are impostors 
are respected on account of their garb, as the world is taken in by their attractive 
appearance. But they are eventually exposed, and cannot keep up their false appearance 
till the end, as was the case with Kalanemi*, Ravana and Rahu. The good are 
honoured notwithstanding their un becaning appearance, even as Jambavan (a general of 
Sugriva’s army, who was endowed with the form of a bear and possessed miraculous 
strength) and Hanuman (the monkey-god) won honour in this world. Bad association is 
harmful, while good company is an asset in itself: this is true in the world as well as in 
the eyes of the Vedas, and is known to all. Through contact with the wind dust ascends 
to the sky, while it is assimilated with mud when united with low-lying waters. Parrots 
and Mainas nurtured in the house of the virtuous and the wicked repeat the name of 
Rama and pour a volley of abuses respectively. Smoke coming in contact with an evil 
(earthy)§ substance turns into soot; the same is used as a material for copying the 
Puranas with when converted into beautiful ink. Again, in conjunction with water, fire and 
air it is transformed into a cloud and brings life to the world. (1 — 6) 
* Kalanemi was a demon chief, who was a contemporary of Ravana, the mighty king of Lanka. In the 
Larika-Kanda (Book VI. 56 — 58) of this very work we are told how he assumed the false appearance of an 
ascetic and tried to deceive Hanuman, the devoted servant of the divine Sri Rama, but was ultimately detected 
and killed by Hanuman. 

t We read in the Aranyakanda (Book III. 27. 4 — 7) how Ravana appeared before Sita in the garb of a 
mendicant but could not keep up his false appearance for long and had to throw off his mask at last. 

if In the Puranas we are told how at the beginning of creation nectar was churned out of the ocean of 
milk conjointly by the gods and the demons. When the same was being served to the gods by God Visnu 
Himself (who had assumed the form of a charming damsel in order to put the demons off the scent), the demon 
Rahu disguised himself as a god and took his seat in the celestial row to participate in the feast. He was, 
however, soon detected by the sun-god and the moon-god, who exposed his real character. 

§ There is a pun on the compound word ‘Kusangati’ in the original. ‘Ku’ is both a noun and an 
indeclinable prefixed to nouns. As an indeclinable it means bad or evil, while as a noun it is a synonym for the 
earth. Here it is used in both the senses and has been translated accordingly. 
The planets, medicines, water, air and cloth prove good or bad in the world 
according to their good or evil associations; only men endowed with a keen insight 
are able to know this. The proportion of moonlight and darkness is the same in the 
bright as well as in the dark fortnight; only the two have been named differently by 
the Creator. Knowing the one as the nourisher and the other as the emaciator of the 
moon, the world has given it a good name and a bad one. Whatever beings, animate 
or inanimate, there are in the universe, recognizing them, one and all, as consisting 
of Sri Rama, I ever adore the lotus feet of all with joined palms. I reverence gods, 
demons, human beings, Nagas, birds, evil spirits, manes (the souls of departed 
ancestors) and Gandharvas, Kinnaras and Raksasas (giants).* Pray, be gracious to 
me all on this occasion. (7 A — D) 

Chapter 6
‘Gandharvas, Kinnaras and Raksasa are different species of superhuman beings. Of these the 
Gandharvas are celestial songsters and are specially noted for their handsome appearance, while the 
kinnaras are credited with the head of a horse. The Raksasas are monstrous in appearance and are said to 
roam at night and feed on the human flesh. The Nagas are another class of semi-divine beings, who, though 
resembling serpents in shape, can take the human form at will. 
Eight million and four hundred thousand* species of living beings, classified under 
four broad divisions, inhabit land, water and the air. Recognizing the entire creation as 
full of Sita and Rama, I make obeisance to them with joined palms. Knowing me as your 
servant, bestav gritin affeeter upan me all of you, O mines of compassion. I have no 
confidence in my intellectual power, hence I supplicate you all. I would recount the 
virtues of the Lord of Raghus,t Sri Rama; but my wits are poor, whereas the exploits 
of Sri Rama are unfathomable. For this I find not the least resources, while I am dull of 
mind and intellect, my ambition is right royal. Even though my intellect is exceedingly 
mean, my aspiration is pitched too high; while I crave for nectar, I have no means in this 
world to procure even butter-milk. The virtuous will forgive my presumption and listen to 
my childish babbling with interest. When a child prattles in lisping accents, the parents 
hear it with a mind full of delight. Those, however, who are hard-hearted, mischievous 
and perverse and cherish others’ faults as an ornament, will feel amused. Who does not 
like one’s own poetry, be it delightful or exceedingly insipid? Such good people as delight 
to hear others’ composition are rare in this world. The world abounds in men who 
resemble lakes and rivers, that get swollen with their own rise when waters are added 
to them. There is some rare good soul like the ocean, which swells at the sight of the 
full moon. (1 — 7) 
Humble is my lot and my ambition high; my only hope is that all good men will be 
gratified to hear what I say, while the evil-minded will ridicule. (8) 
* The number of species of living beings has been categorically fixed in Hindu scriptures as 
eighty-four lakhs. The four broad divisions are: (1) Jarayuja (viviparous, such as men and beasts), (2) 
Andaja (oviparous), (3) Svedaja (born of sweat, such as lice, bugs etc.,) and (4) Udbhijja (sprouting from 
the soil, viz., plants). 

t King Raghu was a forbear of Sri Rama. His descendants bore the name of Raghus. Having been the 
head of the clan after His father, Dasaratha, He is aptly called the Lord of the Raghus. 

Chapter 7
The Vidicule of the evil-minded will benefit me; crows call the cuckoo hoarse. 
Herons ridicule the swan, frogs make fun of the Cataka bird and malicious rogues deride 
refined speech. To those who have no taste for poetry nor devotion to the feet of Sri 
Rama, this undertaking of mine will serve as a subject for delightful mirth. My composition 
is couched in the popular dialect and my intellect is feeble; hence it is a fit subject for 
ridicule, and those who laugh shall not incur any blame. To those who cherish no love 
for the feet of the Lord and have no sound reason either, this story will sound unattractive 
to the ears. To those, however, who possess devotion to the feet of God Visnu and Siva 
and whose mind is not perverse, the tale of the Chief of the Raghus will taste as sweet. 
Knowing it in their heart as adorned with devotion to Sri Rama, the virtuous will listen to 
it with bland words of praise. I am no poet nor an adept in the art of speech and am a 
cipher in all arts and sciences. There are elegant devices of letters, subtleties of meaning, 
various figures of speech, metrical compositions of different kinds, infinite varieties of 
emotions and sentiments and multifarious flaws and excellences of poetic composition. 
Of these details of poesy, I possess critical knowledge of none. I vouch for it in writing 
on a blank sheet. (1 — 6) 
My composition is devoid of all charm; it has only one merit, which is known 
throughout the world. Recognizing this merit, men of sound reason, who are gifted with 
unbiased judgment, will surely hear it. 
It contains the gracious name of the Lord of Raghus, which is exceedingly holy 
and the very cream of the Puranas and the Vedas. It is the abode of blessings and the 
remover of evils, and is muttered by Lord Siva, the enemy of the demon Tripura, along- 
with his consort, Uma. Even a composition of marvellous beauty and written by a gifted 
poet does not commend itself without the name of Sri Rama. A pretty woman with a 
charming countenance and fully adorned, does not look attractive when undressed. On 
the other hand, the wise recite and hear with admiration even the composition of a 
worthless poet, which is devoid of all merit, knowing it as adorned with the name and 
glory of Sri Rama; for, like the bee, saints have a bias for goodness. Although it has no 
poetic charm whatsoever, the glory of Sri Rama is manifest in it. This is the only hope 
which flashes on my mind; who has not been exalted by noble company? Even smoke 
rising from burning aloe wood is impregnated with the latter’s fragrance and gives up its 
natural pungency. Although my composition is clumsy, it treats of a commendable theme, 
viz., the story of Sri Rama, which brings felicity to the world. (1 — 5) 
The tale of the Lord of Raghus, 0 Tulasidasa, brings forth blessings and wipes 
away the impurities of the Kali age. The course of this stream of my poetry is tortuous 
like that of the holy Gariga. By its association with the auspicious glory of the Lord my 
composition will be blessed and will captivate the mind of the virtuous. On the person of 
Lord Siva, even the ashes of the cremation-ground appear charming and purify by their 
very thought. 
My composition will appear extremely delightful to all by its association with the 
glory of Sri Rama, even as timber of every description is transformed into sandal and 
becomes worthy of adoration by contact with the Malaya mountain (in South India), 
and nobody takes into account the quality of wood in that region. The milk of even 
a dark cow is white and possesses a great medicinal value and is drunk by all. So 
do the wise chant and hear the glory of Sita and Rama even though couched in the 
vulgar tongue. (10 A-B) 

Chapter 8
The beauty of a gem, a ruby and a pearl does not catch the eye as it should so 
long as they are borne on the head of a serpent, the top of a mountain and the crown 
of an elephant respectively. The charm of them all is enhanced when they adorn the 
diadem of a king or the person of a young lady. Even so, the wise say, the outpourings 
of a good poet originate at one place (in the poet’s own mind) and exercise their charm 
elsewhere (on the mind of the admirer). Attracted by his devotion, SarasvatT (the 
goddess of poetry) comes with all speed from the abode of Brahma (the topmost heaven) 
at his very invocation. The fatigue occasioned by this long journey cannot be relieved by 
millions of devices unless she takes a dip in the lake of Sri Rama’s exploits. Realizing 
this in their heart, poets and wise men chant the glory of Sri Hari alone, which wipes 
away the impurities of the Kali age. Finding the bard singing the glories of worldly men 
the goddess of speech begins to beat her brow and repent. The wise liken the heart of 
a poet to the sea, his intellect to the shell containing pearls and goddess Sarasvati to the 
star called Svati (the modern Arcturus, the fifteenth lunar asterism considered as 
favourable to the formation of pearls). If there is a shower in the form of beautiful ideas, 
lovely pearls make their appearance in the form of poetic effusions. (1 — 5) 
If those pearls are pierced with skill and strung together on the beautiful thread of 
Sri Rama’s exploits, and if noble souls wear them in their innocent heart, grace in the 
form of excessive fondness is the result. (11) 
Those who are born in this terrible age of Kali, who though akin to the crow in their 
doings have put on the garb of a swan, who tread the evil path, abandoning the track 
of the Vedas, who are embodiments of falsehood and repositories of sins of the Kali age, 
who are impostors claiming to be devotees of Sri Rama, though slaves of mammon, 
anger and passion, and who are unscrupulous, hypocritical and foremost among 
intriguers — I occupy the first place among them. Were I to recount all my vices, their tale 
will assume large dimensions, and yet I shall not be able to exhaust them. Hence I have 
mentioned very few. A word should suffice for the wise. Entering into the spirit of my 
manifold prayers, none should blame me on hearing this story. Those who will raise 
objections even then are more stupid and deficient in intellect than myself. I am no poet 
and have no pretensions to ingenuity; I sing the glories of Sri Rama according to my own 
lights, My intellect, which wallows in the world, is a poor match for the unlimited exploits 
of the Lord of Raghus. Tell me, of what account is cotton in the face of the strong wind 
before which even mountains like Meru are blown away? Realizing the infinite glory of 
Sri Rama, my mind feels very diffident in proceeding with this story. (1 — 6) 
Goddess Sarasvati Sesa (the thousand-headed serpent-god), the great Lord 
Siva, Brahma (the Creator), the Agamas (Tantras), the Vedas and the Puranas unceasingly 
sing His virtues, saying ‘not that’, ‘not that’.* 

* This shows that the gods and scriptures mentioned above, though ever engaged in singing the 
virtues of Sri Rama, are able only to touch the fringe of His glory and find themselves unable to describe it in 
full. That is why they make only a negative assertion ‘Na iti’ (not that), meaning thereby that whatever is 
predicated of God falls much too short of His real glory and is at best only a faint indication of it. 
Though all know the Lord’s greatness as such, yet none has refrained from 
describing it. The Vedas have justified it thus; they have variously sung the glory of 
remembering the Lord, God, who is one, desireless, formless, nameless and unborn, 
who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss, who is supreme effulgence, all-pervading and 
all-formed — it is He who has performed many deeds assuming a suitable form. That He 
has done only for the good of His devotees; for He is supremely gracious and loving to 
the suppliant. He is excessively fond of His devotees and treats them as His own; He 
has never frowned at him to whom He has once shown His favour. The restorer of what 
has been lost, the proteetor of the poor, the Lord of Raghus is a straightforward and 
powerful master. Knowing thus, the wise sing the glory of Sri Hari and thereby hallow and 
bring supreme reward to their speech. It is on this strength (the supreme efficacy of 
remembering the Lord and the potency of His grace) that I shall sing the virtues of the 
Lord of Raghus, bowing my head to the feet of Sri Rama. Sages have sung the glory of 
Sri Hari in the past; it will be easy for me to follow that very path. (1 — 5) 

If kings get bridges constructed over big rivers, which are too broad, even the 
tiniest ants cross them without exertion. (13) 


Reassuring the mind in this way, I shall narrate the charming story of the Lord of 
Raghus. Vyasa and various other top-ranking poets, who have reverently recounted the 
blessed glory of Sri Hari, I bow to the lotus feet of them all; let them fulfil all my desires. 
I make obeisance to the poets of the Kali age, who have sung the multitudinous virtues 
of the Lord of Raghus. Even those poets of supreme wisdom who belong to the Prakrta 
or popular class (as opposed to the Sarhskrta or the cultured class), who have narrated 
the exploits of Sri Hari in the spoken language, including those who have flourished in 
the past, those who are still living and those who are yet to come, I reverence them, one 
and all, renouncing all false appearance. Be propitious and grant this boon that my song 
may be honoured in the assemblage of pious souls. A composition which the wise refuse 
to honour is fruitless labour which only silly poets undertake. Of glory, poetry and affluence 
that alone is blessed which, like the celestial river (Gariga), is conducive to the good of 
all. The glory of Sri Rama is charming indeed, while my speech is rough. This is 
something incongruous, I am afraid. By your grace, even this incongruity will turn out well 
for me; embroidery of silk looks charming even on coarse cloth. (1 — 6) 
The wise admire only that poetry which is lucid and portrays a spotless character 
and which even opponents hear with applause forgetting natural animosity. Such poetry 
is not possible without a refined intellect, and of intellectual power I have very little. Be 
gracious, therefore so that I may depict the glory of Sri Hari; I solicit again and again. 
Poets and wise men, lovely swans sporting in the Manasarovara lake of Sri Rama’s 
exploits! Hearing my childlike prayer and recognizing my refined taste, be kindly 
disposed towards me. (14 A — C) 
* BALA-KANDA * 41 

Chapter 9
I bow to the lotus feet of the sage (Valmiki) who composed the Ramayana, which 
though containing an account of the demon Khara (a cousin of Ravana), is yet very soft 
and charming, and though faultless, is yet full of references to Dusana (another cousin 
of the demon-king Ravana).* I reverence, all the four Vedas, barks as it were on the 
ocean of mundane existence, which never dream of weariness in singing the untarnished 
glory of Sri Rama, the Chief of Raghus. I greet the dust on the feet of Brahma (the 
Creator), who has evolved the ocean of worldly existence, the birth-place of nectar, the 
moon and the cow of plenty in the form of saints, on the one hand, and of poison and 
wine in the form of the wicked, on the other. f Making obeisance to the feet of gods, the 
Brahmanas, wise men and the deities presiding over the nine planets, I pray to them with 
joined palms! Be pleased to accomplish all my fair desires. (14 D — G) 
* There is a pun on the words ‘Sakhara’ and Dusana sahita’ in the original, which are capable of a 
twofold interpretation ‘Khara’ and ‘Dusana’ as proper nouns denote two of Ravana’s cousins, whose figure in 
the Aranyakanda of the great epic poem of Valmfki and lead a military expedition against Sri Rama in order 
to avenge themselves of the insult offered to their sister, Surpanakha, by Laksmana, Sri Rama’s younger 
brother. They are eventually killed by Sri Rama, who proves too strong for the redoubtable demon chiefs. 
‘Khara’ also means sharp-edged or hard and is thus contrasted with ‘Sukomala’ (soft). Similarly, ‘Dusana’ 
also means a fault and thus the poet express himself to a contradiction in terms when he calls the Ramayana 
both ‘Dosarahita’ (faultless) and Dusanasahita’ (full of faults). The contradiction, however, is only verbal in 
both cases and constitutes a figure of speech known by the name ‘Virodha’ or ‘Virodhabhasa’. 

t This has an indirect reference to the churning of the ocean of milk as described in the Puranas, by 
the joint labours of gods and demons at the beginning of creation, which yielded beneficent objects like 
nectar, the moon and the cow of plenty, on the one hand, and pernicious substances like poison and wine on 
the other. 

Again, I bow to goddess Sarasvati and the celestial river Gariga, both of whom are 
holy and perform agreeable roles. The one (Gariga) wipes away sin through immersion 
and draught; the other (Sarasvati) dispels ignorance through the recital and hearing of 
her glory. I adore the great Lord Siva and His consort Goddess Bhavani (Parvati), my 
preceptors and parents, friends of the forlorn and ever given to charity, servants, 
masters and friends of Sita’s Lord, and true benefactors of TulasTdasa in everyway. 
Seeing the prevalence of the Kali age Hara and Girija (Siva and Parvati) evolved a string 
of spells in the tongue of savages, incoherent syllables which yield no interpretation and 
require no repetition, but whose efficacy is patent, revealing Siva’s glory. That Lord of 
Lima (Parvati), favourable as He is to me, shall make this story of mine a source of 
blessings and joy. Thus invoking Lord Siva and His Consort, Siva (Parvati), and 
obtaining Their favour, I relate the exploits of SrT Rama with a heart full of ardour. By 
Siva’s grace my composition will shed its lustre even as a night shines in conjunction 
with the moon and the stars. Those who will fondly and intelligently recite or hear this 
story with attention will develop devotion to the feet of SrT Rama and, purged of the 
impurities of Kali, will obtain choice blessings. (1 — 6) 
If Hara and Gauri (Lord Siva and Parvati) are really propitious to me, even in 
dream, let all that I have said in glorification of this poetry of mine, written in a popular 
dialect, come out true. (15) 

Chapter 10
I reverence the exceedingly holy city of Ayodhya (Sri Rama’s birth-place) and the 
river Sarayu (flowing beside it), which wipes out the sins of the Kali age. Again, I bow
to the men and women of the city, who enjoy the affection of the Lord in no small degree. 
Even though they were damned as a result of the heap of sins incurred by the 
calumniators of Sita (who were instrumental in bringing about Her lifelong exile), they 
were lodged in a heavenly abode, having been divested of sorrow. I greet Kausalya (the 
eldest queen of king Dasaratha) whose glory stands diffused throughout the world. She 
is the eastern horizon whence arose the lovely moon in the shape of the Lord of Raghus, 
who affords delight to the entire universe and is blighting as frost to lotuses in the form 
of the wicked. Recognizing king Dasaratha together with all his consorts as incarnations 
of merit and fair blessings, I make obeisance to them in thought, word and deed. Knowing 
me as a servant of your son, be gracious to me. The father and mothers of Sri Rama 
are the very perfection of glory, by creating whom even Brahma (the Creator) has 
exalted himself. (1 — 4) 
I adore the king of Ayodhya, who cherished such true love for the feet of Sri Rama 
that he gave up his dear life as a mere straw the moment the Lord, who is compassionate 
to the poor, parted from him. (16) 
I make obeisance to king Janaka, alongwith his family, who bore secret affection 
for the feet of Sri Rama. Even though he had veiled it under the cloak of asceticism and 
luxury, it broke out the moment he saw Sri Rama. Of Sri Rama’s brothers, I bow, first 
of all, to the feet of Bharata, whose self-discipline and religious austerity beggar 
description and whose mind thirsts for the lotus feet of Sri Rama like a bee and never 
leaves their side. I reverence the lotus feet of Laksmana — cool and charming and a 
source of delight to the devotee — whose renown served as a staff for the spotless flag 
of Sri Rama’s glory. He is no other than the thousand-headed serpent-god, Sesa, the 
cause (support) of the universe, who came down to dispel the fear of the earth. May that 
son of Sumitra, an ocean of benevolence and a mine of virtues, be ever propitious to me. 
I adore the lotus feet of Satrughna (lit., the slayer of his foes), who is valiant yet amiable 
in disposition, and a constant companion of Bharata. I supplicate Hanuman, the great 
hero, whose glory has been extolled by Sri Rama Himself. (1 — 5) 
I greet Hanuman, the son of the wind-god, an embodiment of wisdom, who is fire 
as it were for the forest of the wicked, and in the abode of whose heart resides Sri Rama, 
equipped with a bow and arrows. (17) 
The lord of monkeys (Sugriva), the chief of bears (Jambavan), the king of demons (Vibhisana) and the host of monkeys beginning with Arigada, I reverence the charming 
feet of all, who attained Sri Rama even though born in the lowest species. As many 
worshippers there are of the feet of Raghupati (the Lord of Raghus), including birds, 
beasts, gods, human beings and demons, I adore the lotus feet of them all, who are 
disinterestedservants of Sri Rama. Suka, Sanaka and others (viz., Sanandana, Sanatana 
and Sanatkumara), sage Narada and all other eminent sages who are devotees of 
God and proficient in the spiritual lore, I make obeisance to all, placing my head on 
the ground; be gracious to me, O Lords of ascetics knowing me as your servant. Janaki, 
daughter of Janaka and mother of the universe and the most beloved consort of Sri 
Rama, the Fountain of Mercy, I seek to propitiate the pair of Her lotus feet, so that 
by Her grace I may be blessed with a refined intellect. Again, I adore, in thought, word 
and deed, the lotus feet of the all-worthy Lord of Raghus, who has lotus-like eyes 
and wields a bow and arrows, and who relieves the distress of His devotees and 
affords delight to them. (1 — 5) 
I reverence the feet of Sita and Rama, who though stated to be different are yet 
identical just like a word and its meaning or like water and the waves on its surface, and 
to whom the afflicted are most dear. (18) 
I greet the name ‘Rama’ of the chief of Raghus,* which is composed of 


* This distinguishes the Name from the two other names bearing the same sound but denoting two 
other personalities, viz., Parasurama and Balarama (the elder brother of Sri Krsna). 
seed-letters* * * § representing the fire-god, the sun-god and the moon-god (viz., Ra, A and 
Ma respectively). It is the same as Brahma (the creative aspect of God), Visnu (His 
preservative aspect) and Siva (His disintegrating aspect), and the vital breath of the Vedas; 
It is attributeless, peerless and a mine of virtues. It is the great spell which Lord Mahesvara 
mutters and which, when imparted by Him at KasT (the modern Varanasi) leads to 
emancipationf. Its glory is known to Lord Ganesa, who is worshipped before all others 
as a glary of the Namet- The oldest poet (Valmiki) is acquainted with the glory of the Name, 
inasmuch as he attained to purity by repeating It in the reverse order§. Hearing the verdict 
of Lord Siva that the name is as good as a thousand other names of God, Goddess Bhavani 
(Parvati) dined with Her consort after uttering It only once#. Noticing such partiality of Her 
heart for the Name, Hara (Lord Siva) made that lady, who was the ornament of Her sex, 
the ornament of His own person (i.e. , made Her a part of His own being by assigning to 
Her the left half of His body). Siva knows full well the power of the Name, due to which 
deadly poison served the purpose of nectar to Him. (1 — 4) 

Devotion to the Lord of Raghus is, as it were, the rainy season and the noble 
devotees, says Tulasidasa, represent the paddy crop; while the two charming syllables 
of the name ‘Rama’ stand for the two months of Sravana and Bhadrapada (corresponding 
roughly to July and August). (19) 


* Each letter-sound of the Sarhskrta Alphabet represents one or more gods of the Hindu pantheon and 
the Tantras claim that these letters (which are technically known by the name of BTja-Mantras or seed-letters), 
if joined with other spells sacred to that particular deity and repeated with due ceremony a fixed number of 
times possess the efficacy of revealing the deity in person before the worshipper and propitiating him or her. 

t The scriptures maintain that Lord Siva, the deity presiding over the holy city of KasT, whispers into the 
right ear of every creature, dying within its boundaries, the name ‘Rama’ and thereby brings emancipation to 
the dying soul. 

t We read in the Puranas how there was a scramble for precedence among the gods, each of whom 
claimed the first position for himself. They approached Brahma for a ruling. He told them that they should race 
round the world and that whoever finished the round quickest of all would be accounted the highest. Ganesa, 
who rode on no better animal than a rat, naturally lagged behind. He met on the way the celestial sage 
Narada, who advised him to scratch the word ‘Rama’ on the ground and pace round It, as the word comprised 
in Itself the entire creation. Ganesa did accordingly and was naturally the first to finish the round of the 
universe. Brahma appreciated this act of Ganesa and conceded his title to precedence over all the other gods. 
Since then Ganesa has uninterruptedly enjoyed the right of being worshipped first of all. 

§ Valmiki was a highway robber in his earlier life and was known by the name of Ratnakara. Seven 
seers, who once fell a victim to his depredation, awakened him to the reprehensible nature of his conduct and 
instructed him in the holy name of Rama. Completely immersed in sin he was, however, unable to utter the 
word. The seers, therefore, asked him to repeat the name in the reverse order. In this way he was eventually 
able to utter the name correctly and in course of time became so fond of repeating It that he ultimately turned 
out to be a pious sage and seer and related the story of SrT Rama in fine verse even before His advent. 

# We are told in the Padmapurana how Bhagavan Sankara once invited His consort to join Him in His 
dinner. Goddess ParvatT, however, declind on the ground that She had not yet recited the Visnu-Sahasranama, 
which She must before Her breakfast. Bhagavan Sankara asked Her to repeat the name of Rama instead, as 
a single utterance of the Name was as good as reciting a thousand other names of the Lord. ParvatT did 
accordingly and forthwith joined Her lord in dinner. 




BALA-KANDA 
Both the letter-sounds are sweet and attractive; they are the two eyes, as it were, 
of the Alphabet and the very life of the devotee. Easy to remember and delightful to one 
and all, they bring gain here and provide sustenance hereafter. They are most delightful 
to utter, hear and remember and are dear as Rama and Laksmana to TulasTdasa. When 
treated separately, the two letters lose their harmony (i.e., are differently pronounced, 
bear diverse meaning in the form of seed-letters and as such yield different results); 
whereas they are naturally allied even as Brahma (the Cosmic Spirit) and Jiva (the 
individual soul) Good brothers like the divine sages Nara and Narayana, they are 
sustainers of the universe and redeemers of the devotee in particular. They are beautiful 
ornaments for the ears of the fair damsel in the form of Bhakti (Devotion) and stand as 
the spotless sun and moon for the good of the world. They are like the taste and the 
gratifying quality of nectar in the form of emancipation, and are supporters of the globe 
like the divine Tortoise* and the serpent-god Sesa. Again, they are like bees for the 
beautiful lotus in the shape of the devotee’s mind and are the very like of Hari (Sri Krsna) 
and Haladhara (Balarama, who wielded a plough as a weapon) for Yasoda (Their foster- 
mother, the wife of Nanda) in the shape of the tongue. (1 — 4) 
Lo! the two letters (t and^r) forming part of the name of Raghuvara (the Chief of 
the Raghu) crown all the letters of the Alphabet, the one spreading like an umbrella and 
the other resting as a crest-jewel, O Tulasidasa.f (20) 

* We are told in the Bhagavata and other Puranas how God Visnu assumed the form of a gigantic 
tortoise in order to support Mount Mandara and prevent it from sinking while it was being rotated by gods and 
demons in their attempt to churn the ocean of milk and obtain nectar out of it. 

f The letter V of the Sarhskrta alphabet, when immediately preceding another consonant or the 




Chapter 11
The name and the object named, though similar in significance, are allied as 
master and servant one to the other. (That is to say, even though there is complete 
identity between God and His name, the former closely follows the latter even as a 
servant follows his master. The Lord appears in person at the very mention of His 
Name). Name and form are the two attributes of God; both of them are ineffable and 
beginningless and can be rightly understood only by means of good intelligence. It is 
presumptuous on one’s part to declare as to which is superior or inferior. Hearing the 
distinctive merits of both, pious souls will judge for themselves. Forms are found to be 
subordinate to the name; without the name you cannot come to the knowledge of a form. 
Typical forms cannot be identified, even if they be in your hand, without knowing their 
name. And if the name is remembered even without seeing the form, the latter flashes 
on the mind with a special liking for it. The mystery of name and form is a tale which 
cannot be told; though delightful to comprehend, it cannot be described in words. 
Between the unqualified Absolute and qualified Divinity, the Name is a good intermediary; 
it is a clever interpreter revealing the truth of both. (1 — 4) 
Instal the luminous gem in the shape of the divine name ‘Rama’ on the threshold of the tongue at the doorway of your mouth, if you will have light both inside and outside, 
O Tulasidasa. (21) 
Yogis (mystics) who are full of dispassion and are wholly detached from God’s 
creation keep awake (in the daylight of wisdom) muttering the Name with their tongue, 
and enjoy the felicity of Brahma (the Absolute), which is incomparable, unspeakable, 
unmixed with sorrow and devoid of name and form. Even those (seekers of Truth) who 
aspire to know the mysterious ways of Providence are able to comprehend them by 
muttering the Name. Strivers (hankering after worldly achievements) repeat the Name, 
absorbed in contemplation, and become accomplished, acquiring superhuman powers 
such as that of becoming infinitely small in size.* If devotees in distress mutter the Name, 
their worst calamities of the gravest type disappear and they become happy. In this world 
there are four kinds of devoteesf of 6ri Rama; all the four of them are virtuous, sinless 
and noble. All the four, clever as they are, rely upon the Name. Of these the enlightened 
devotee is specially dear to the Lord. The glory of the Name is supreme in all the four 
Yugas and all the four Vedas, particularly in the Kali age, in which there is no other 
means of salvation. (1 — 4) 
* Works on Yoga enumerate the following eight kinds of miraculous powers acquired by Yogis: — 

(i) Anima (the faculty of reducing one’s body to the size of an atom), (ii) Mahima (the power of expand- 
ing one’s body to an infinitely large size), (iii) Garima (the power of becoming infinitely heavy), (iv) Laghima 
(the power of becoming infinitely light in body), (v) Prapti (unrestricted access to all places), (vi) Prakamya 
(realizing whatever one desires), (vii) Isitva (absolute lordship) and (viii) Vasitva (subjugating all). 

f SrTmad bhagavadglta mentions four kinds of devotees, viz., (i) Arta (the afflicted), (ii) Jijnasu (the 
seeker of Truth), (iii) Artharthi (the seeker of worldly riches) and (iv) JnanT (the enlightened), and speaks of 
them all as virtuous and benevolent. Of course, the enlightened devotee, it is pointed out, is the most beloved 
of the Lord and constitutes His very self (vide VII 16 — 18). 

50

Even those who are free from all desires and absorbed in the joy of devotion to 
Sri Rama have thrown their heart as fish into the nectarine lake of supreme affection for 
the Name. (22) 
There are two aspects of God — the one unqualified and the other qualified. Both 
these aspects are unspeakable, unfathomable, without beginning and without parallel. To 
my mind, greater than both is the Name, that has established Its rule over both by Its 
might. Friends should not take this as a bold assertion on the part of this servant; I record 
my mind’s own conviction, love and liking. The two aspects of Brahma (God) should be 
recognized as akin to fire: the one (viz., the Absolute) represents fire which is latent in 
wood; while the other (qualified Divinity) corresponds to that which is externally visible. 
Though both are inaccessible by themselves, they are easily attainable through the 
Name; therefore I have called the Name greater than Brahma and Sri Rama both. 
Brahma (God) is one, all-pervading and imperishable; He is all truth, consciousness and 
a compact mass of joy. Even though such immutable Lord is present in every heart, all 
beings in this world are nonetheless miserable and unhappy. Through the practice of the 
Name preceded by Its true appraisement, however, the same Brahma reveals Itself even 
as the value of a jewel is revealed by its correct knowledge. (1 — 4) 

* BALA-KANDA * 51 

The glory of the Name is thus infinitely greater than that of the Absolute; I shall 
show below how in my judgment the Name is superior even to Sri Rama. (23) 
Chapter 12
For the sake of His devotees Sri Rama assumed the form of a human being and, 
suffering calamities Himself, brought relief to the pious. By fondly repeating His Name, 
on the other hand, devotees easily become abodes of joy and blessings. Sri Rama 
Himself redeemed a single woman (Ahalya), 1 the wife of an ascetic; while His Name 
corrected the error of crores of wicked souls. For the sake of the sage (Visvamitra) Sri 
Rama wrought the destruction of Suketu’s daughter 2 (Tadaka) with her army and son 
(Subahu); while His Name puts an end to the devotee’s vain hopes alongwith his errors 
and sorrows even as the sun terminates night. In His own person Sri Rama broke the 
bow of Siva 3 , while the very glory of His Name dispels the fear of rebirth 4 . The Lord 
restored the charm of the Dandaka forest 5 alone, while His Name purified the mind of 
countless devotees .The Delighter of Raghus (Sri Rama) crushed only a host of demons, 
while His Name uproots all the impurities of the Kali age. (1 — 4) 


4. Here there is a pun on the word ‘Bhava’ which has been used as a synonym of Lord Siva in the first 
instance and again in the sense of rebirth. The comparison has been drawn between Sri Rama Himself, on 
the one hand, and the glory of His Name (not the Name Itself) on the other. The latter, it is pointed out, excels 
the former in that while Sri Rama broke a concrete object like the bow, the glory of His Name dispels an 
abstract thing like the fear of rebirth. 

5. The forest of Dandaka had been rendered unfit for life in any form whatsoever under a curse from 
the sage Sukracarya. The divine presence of Sri Rama, however, removed the curse and restored the forest 
to its original charm. 

52

The Lord of Raghus conferred immortality only on faithful servants like Sabari (the 
celebrated Bhila woman) and the vulture (Jatayu)*, while His Name has delivered 
innumerable wretches; the tale of Its virtues is well-known in the Vedas. (24) 
As is well-known to all, Sri Rama extended His protection to two devotees only, 
viz., Sugriva and Vibhisana; His Name, on the other hand, has showered Its grace on 
numerous humble souls. This superb glory of the Name shines forth in the world as well 
as in the Vedas. Sri Rama collected an army of bears and monkeys and took no little 
pains over the construction of a bridge (to connect the mainland with the island of Lanka). 
Through the repetition of His Name, however, the ocean of mundane existence itself gets 
dried up: let the wise bear this in mind. Sri Rama killed in battle Ravana with all his family 
and returned to His own city with Sita. He was then crowned king in the capital of 
Ayodhya, while gods and sages sang His glories in choicest phrases. His servants are, 
however, able to conquer the formidable army of error by fondly remembering His Name 
and, absorbed in devotion, move about in joy which is peculiarly their own; by the grace 
of the Name they know not sorrow even in dream. (1 — 4) 
The Name is thus greater than Brahma and Sri Rama both and confers blessings 
* For the accounts of Sabari and Jatayu see Aranyakanda 33.3 to 36 and 28.4 to 32 respectively.
even on the bestowers of boons. Knowing this in His heart, the great Lord Siva chose this 
word (Rama) for Himself out of Sri Rama’s story comprising 100 crore verses.* (25) 

By the grace of the Name alone Lord Sambhu (Siva) is immortal and, though 
endowed with inauspicious paraphernalia (such as a wreath of skulls), is yet a 
storehouse of blessings. Again, it is by the grace of the Name alone that Siddhas 
(adepts), sages and Yogis like Suka, Sanaka and others enjoy divine raptures, Narada 
realized the glory of the Name; that is why, while Sri Hari is beloved of the world (and 
Hara is dear to Sri Hari), he (Narada) is dear to Hari and Hara (Visnu and Siva) both. 
It was because of his repeating the Name that the Lord showered His grace on Prahlada, 
who thereby became the crest-jewel of devotees. Dhruva repeated the name of Sri Hari 
with a feeling of indignation (at the harsh treatment received from his step-mother) and 
thereby attained a fixed and incomparable station in the heavens. It is by remembering 
the holy Name that Hanuman (son of the wind-god) holds Sri Rama under His thumb. 
The vile Ajamila and even the celebrated elephant and the harlot of the legend were 
liberated by the power of Sri Hari’s name. I have no words to depict the glory of the 
Name: not even Rama can adequately glorify it. (1 — 4) 
The name of Rama is a wish-yielding tree, the very home of beatitude in this age 
of Kali, by remembering which Tulasidasa (the poet himself) was transformed from an 
intoxicating drug like the hemp-plant into the holy basil. (26) 

* The Ramayana as originally composed by Brahma himself and delivered to Lord Siva through 
Narada is believed to have contained as many as a 1 00 crore verses. 


(Not only in this Kali age, but) in all the four ages*, at all times (past, present and 
future) and in all the three spheres (viz., heaven, earth and the subterranean region) 
creatures have been rid of grief by repeating the Name. The verdict of the Vedas and 
the Puranas as well as of saints is just this; that love of Rama (or the name ‘Rama’) is 
the reward of all virtuous acts. In the first age, through meditation; in the second age, 
through sacrifice; and in the Dvapara age the Lord is propitiated through worship. This 
age of Kali, however, is simply corrupt and the root of all impurities, where the mind of 
man wallows like a fish in the ocean of sin. In this terrible age the Name alone is the 
wish-yielding tree, the very thought of which puts an end to all the illusions of the world. 
The Name of Rama is the bestower of one’s desired object in this age of Kali; It is 
beneficent in the other world and one’s father and mother in this world. In Kaliyuga neither 
Karma (action) nor Bhakti (devotion) nor again Jnana (knowledge) avails; the name of 
Rama is the only resort. The age of Kali is as it were the demon Kalanemi, the repository 
of all wiles; whereas the Name is the wise and mighty Hanuman.f (1 — 4) 


* The span of life of the universe, which is known by the name of Kalpa and consists of 4,32,00,00,000 
human years, has been divided into 1 ,000 epochs or Caturyugas. Each Caturyuga is made up of four Yugas 
or ages, viz., Satyayuga, Treta, Dvapara and Kaliyuga. Their duration is given below: 

Satyayuga 1 7,28,000 years 

Treta 12,96,000 » 

Dvapara 8,64,000 » 

Kaliyuga 4,32,000 » 

Thus it will, be seen that the duration of Dvapara is twice that of Kaliyuga, that of Treta thrice that of 
Kaliyuga and that of Satyayuga four times that of Kaliyuga. In this way the duration of a Caturyuga is ten times 
that of Kaliyuga. 

t The story of Kalanemi and his death at the hands of Hanuman has been briefly told in the foot-note 
under 6.3 in this very Kanda. 




BALA-KANDA 


55 
(To use another metaphor) the Name of Rama is, as it were, the Lord manifested 
as a man-lion and the age of Kali; the demon Hiranyakaslpu. Crushing this enemy of 
gods, the Name will protect the devotees repeating It, even as the Man-lion protected 
Prahlada. (27) 
The Name repeated either with good or evil intentions, in an angry mood or even 
while yawning, diffuses joy in all the ten directions. Remembering that Name and 
bowing my head to the Lord of Raghus, I proceed to recount the virtues of Sri Rama. 
He whose grace is never tired of showing its good-will to others will mend my errors 
in everyway. Rama a noble Lord, and a poor servant like myself! Yet, true to His 
own disposition, that storehouse of compassion has fostered me. In the world as well 
as in the Vedas we observe the following characteristic in a good master, viz., that 
he comes to recognize one’s devotion to him as soon as he hears one’s prayer. Rich 
or poor, rustic or urban, learned or unlettered, of good repute or bad, a good poet 
or a bad one, all men and women extol the king according to his or her light. And 
the pious, sensible, amiable and supremely compassionate ruler, who takes his descent 
from a Iragnest of God, greets all with sweet words hearing their compliments and 
appraising their composition, devotion, supplication and conduct. Such is the way of earthly 
monarchs, to say nothing of the Lord of Kosala (Sri Rama), who is the crest-jewel 
of wise men. Sri Rama gets pleased with unalloyed love; but who is duller and more 
impure of mind in this world than I? (1 — 6) 
The benevolent Rama will nonetheless respect the devotion and pleasure of this 
wicked servant — Sri Rama, who made barks out of rocks and wise counsellors out of 
monkeys and bears. Everybody calls me a servant of the Lord and I myself claim to be 
one; and Sri Rama puts up with the scoffing remark that a master like Sita’s Lord has 
a servant like Tulasidasa. (28 A-B) 

My presumption and error are indeed very great and, hearing the tale of my sins, 
even hell has scarnet at them. I shudder to think of it due to my assumed fears; while 

Sri Rama took no notice of them even in a dream. The Lord, on the other hand, applauded 

my devotion and spirit on hearing of, perceiving and scanning them with the mind’s eye. 
If there is anything good in one’s heart, it is marred by the telling; for Sri Rama is pleased 
to note what is there in the devotee’s mind. The Lord never cherishes in His mind the 
lapse, if any, on part of a devotee; while He remembers the latter’s spirit a hundred 
times. For instance, the very crime of which He had killed Vali (the monkey-king 
of Kiskindha) even as a huntsman, was repeated in the misdemeanour perpetrated
by Sugriva* Vibhisana too was guilty of the same offence; but Sri Rama took no 
cognizance of it even in a dream. The Hero of Raghu’s clan, on the other hand, honoured 
them both at His meeting with Bharata (on His return from Lanka) and commended them 
in open court. (1 — 4) 
While the Lord sat at the foot of trees, the monkeys perched themselves high 
on the boughs; such insolent creatures He exalted to His own position! There is no 
lord so generous as Sri Rama, O Tulasidasa! Your goodness, O Rama, is beneficent 
to all; if this is a fact, Tulasidasa too will be blessed by the same. Thus revealing 
my merits and demerits and bowing my head once more to all, I proceed to sing the 
immaculate glory of the Chief of Raghus, by hearing which the impurities of the Kali 
age are wiped away. (29 A — C) 
* Vail was killed by Sri Rama on the plea that the former had usurped his younger brother’s wife. 
Sugriva and Vibhisana too are stated to have taken Tara (Vail’s wife) and MandodarT (Ravana’s wife) 
respectively as their consort after the death of their husbands. In this way even though Sugriva and Vibhisana 
too were practically guilty of the same offence which brought the Lord’s wrath on Vail, their guilt was 
extenuated by the fact that they took those ladies as wife after their brother’s death and with the consent of the 
other party, and by the further fact that their conduct was in keeping with the practice in vogue among the 
monkey and demon chiefs.That is why, while the poet characterizes Vail’s conduct as a crime (Agha), he 
dismisses Sugriva’s act as a mere misdemeanour 

58

The charming story which Yajnavalkya related to the good sage Bharadvaja, I shall 
repeat the same dialogue at length; let all good souls hear it with a feeling of delight. This 
ravishing tale was conceived by Sambhu (Lord Siva), who graciously communicated it to 
His Consort Uma (Parvati). Siva imparted it once more to Kakabhusundi (a sage in the 
form of crow), knowing him to be a devotee of Sri Rama and one qualified to hear it. And 
it was Yajnavalkya who received it from the latter (Kakabhusundi) and narrated it to 
Bharadvaja. Both these, the listener (Bharadvaja) and the reciter (Yajnavalkya), are 
equally virtuous; they view all alike and are acquainted with the pastimes of Sri Hari. Like 
aremblic myrobalan fruit placed on one’s palm, they hold the past, present and future 
within their knowledge. Besides these, other enlightened devotees of Sri Hari too recite, 
hear and understand this story in diverse ways. (1 — 4) 
Then I heard the same story in the holy Sukaraksetra* (the modern Soron in 
the western United Provinces) from my preceptor; but as I had no sense in those 
days of my childhood, I could not follow it full well. Both the listener and the reciter 
of the mysterious story of Sri Rama must be repositories of wisdom. How, then could 
I, a dull and stupid creature steeped in the impurities of the Kali age, expect to 
follow it ? (30 A-B) 
* The name is associated with the descent of Sri Hari as a Boar (Sukara) who killed Hiranyaksa, the 
elder brother of Hiranyakasipu, and lifted up the earth from the depths of the ocean, to which it had been 
consigned by the said demon. 


59

Nevertheless, when the preceptor repeated the story time after time, I followed it 
to a certain extent according to my poor lights. I shall versify the same in the popular 
tongue, so that my mind may derive satisfaction from it. Equipped with what little 
intellectual and critical power I possess, I shall write with a heart inspired by Sri Hari. The 
story I am going to tell is such as will dispel my own doubts, errors and delusion and 
will serve as a boat for crossing the stream of mundane existence. The story of Rama 
is a solace to the learned and a source of delight to all men and wipes out the impurities 
of the Kali age. Sri Rama’s story is a pea-hen for the serpent in the form of the Kali age; 
again, it is a wooden stick* for kindling the sacred fire of wisdom. The tale of Rama is 
the cow of plenty in this age of Kali; it is a beautiful life-giving herb for the virtuous. It is 
a veritable river of nectar on the surface of this globe; it shatters the fear of birth and 
death and is a virtual snake for the frog of delusion. It is beneficent to pious souls-even 
as Goddess Parvati (the daughter of Himavan) is friendly to gods; again, it puts an end 
to hell even as Parvati exterminated the army of demons. It flows from the assemblage 
of saints, even as Laksmi (the goddess of wealth) sprang from the ocean; and like the 
immovable earth it bears the burden of the entire creation. Like the sacred river Yamuna 
in this world it scares away the messengers of Yama (the god of death). It is holy Kasi 


The fire used in sacrifices in India is produced by revolving a wooden stick against a wooden block. 

60
as it were for the liberation of souls. It is dear to Rama as the sacred basil plant and is 
truly beneficent to TulasTdasa as his own mother, Hulasi. It is beloved of Lord Siva as 
the river Narmada (which has its source in Mount Mekala, a peak of the Amarakantaka 
hills); it is a mine of all attainments as well as of happiness and prosperity. It is to noble 
qualities what mother Aditi is to gods; it is the culmination as it were of devotion to and 
love for Sri Rama. (1 — 7) 

The story of Sri Rama is the river Mandakini (which washes the foot of Citrakuta); 
a guileless heart is Mount Citrakuta (one of the happy resorts of Sri Rama during his 
wanderings in the forest); while pure love, says Tulasidasa, is the woodland in which Sita 
and Rama carry on Their divine pastimes. (31) 



BALA-KANDA 


61 

Chapter 12

The narrative of Rama is a lovely wish-yielding gem, and a graceful adornment 
for saintly wisdom. The hosts of virtues possessed by Sri Rama are a blessing to the 
world and the bestowers of liberation, riches, religious merit and the divine abode. They 
are true teachers of wisdom, dispassion and Yoga (contemplative union with God) and 
celestial physicians (Asvinikumaras) for the fell disease of metempsychosis; parents 
of devotion to Sita and Rama and the seed of all holy vows, practices and observances; 
antidotes for sins, agonies and griefs and beloved guardians in this as well as in the 
next world; valiant ministers to King Reason, and a veritable Agastya* drinking up the 
illimitable ocean of greed; young lions residing in the forest of the devotee’s mind to kill 
the herd of elephants in the shape of lust, anger and impurities of the Kali age; dear 
to Lord Siva (the Slayer of the demon Tripura) as a highly respectable and most 
beloved guest, and wish-yielding clouds quenching the wild fire of indigence. They are 
spells and valuable gems as it were for counteracting the venom of serpents in the 
form of sensuous enjoyments, and efface the deep marks of evil destiny contained on 
the forehead. They are sunbeams, as it were, dispelling the darkness of ignorance, and 
clouds nourishing the paddy crop in the form of devotees; trees of paradise, as it were, 
yielding the object of one’s desire; easily available for service and gratifying like Visnu 
and Siva; stars as it were adorning the autumnal sky in the shape of the poet’s mind, 
and the very life’s treasure for the devotees of Sri Rama; a rich harvest of enjoyments 
as it; were yielded by the totality of one’s meritorious deeds and sincerely devoted to 
the good of the world like holy men; sporting in the mind of the devotees as swans in 
the Manasarovara lake and purifying as the waves of the holy Gariga. (1 — 7) 

The hosts of virtues possessed by Sri Rama are like a blazing fire to consume 
the dry wood of evil ways, fallacious reasoning, mischievous practices, deceit, 
hypocrisy and heresy prevailing in Kali. The exploits of Sri Rama are delightful to one 
and all even as the rays of the full moon; they are particularly agreeable and highly 
beneficial to the mind of the virtuous, who can be compared to the white water-lily and 
the Cakoraf bird. (32 A-B) 

* Sage Agastya is said to have drunk up the ocean in three draughts. He was born of a jar; this earn 
him the tittle of ‘Kumbhaja’. 

t The white water-lily is proverbially noted for its attachment to the moon and is supposed to open its 

62

I shall now relate at some length the seed of the story — viz., how Goddess 
Bhavani (Parvati) questioned Lord Sankara and how the latter answered Her questions — 
weaving a strange narrative round this episode. Let no one who should happen not to 
have heard this anecdote before, be surprised to hear it. Wise men who hear this 
uncommon, legend marvel not; for they know there is no limit to the stories of Sri Rama 
in this world. They are convinced in their heart that Sri Rama has bodied Himself forth 
in diverse ways and that the Ramayana, though consisting of a thousand million verses, 
is yet infinite. Great sages have diversely sung the charming stories of Sri Hari, relating 
as they do to different Kalpas or cycles. Bearing this in mind the reader should not 
entertain any doubt and should hear this narrative reverently and with devotion. (1 — 4) 
Rama is infinite, infinite are His virtues and the dimensions of His story are also 
immeasurable. Those whose thoughts are pure will, therefore, feel no surprise when they 
hear it. (33) 
petals in moonlight alone. Similarly the Cakora is said to feed on moonbeams and supposed to be particularly 
enamoured of the moon. 

Chapter 13

Putting away all doubts in this way and placing on my head the dust from the lotus 
feet of my preceptor, I supplicate all with joined palms once more, so that no blame may 
attach to the telling of the story. Reverently bowing my head to Lord Siva, I now proceed 
to recount the fair virtues of Sri Rama, placing my head on the feet of Sri Hari I 
commence this story in the Sartivat year 1631. On Tuesday, the ninth of the lunar 
month of Caitra, this story shed its lustre at Ayodhya. On thes day of Sri Rama’s birth 
the presiding spirits of all holy places flock there — so declare the Vedas — and demons, 
Nagas, birds, human beings, sages and gods come and pay their homage to the 
Lord of Raghus. Wise men celebrate the great birthday festival and sing the sweet glory 
of Sri Rama. (1 — 4) 

Chapter 14

Numerous groups of pious men take dip in the holy water of the Sarayu river and, 
visualizing in their heart the beautiful swarthy form of Sri Rama, mutter His name. (34) 

The very sight and touch of the Sarayu, a dip into its waters or a draught from 
it cleanses one’s sins — so declare the Vedas and Puranas. Even Sarada, the goddess 
of learning, with Her pure intelligence cannot describe the infinite glory of this most 
sacred river. The beautiful town of Ayodhya grants an abode in Sri Rama’s heaven; 
it is celebrated through all the worlds and is the holiest of the holy. There are countless 
living beings in this world belonging to the four species (viz., viviparous, oviparous, 
sweat-born and those shooting from the earth); whoever of these shed their mortal 
coil in Ayodhya are never born again. Knowing the town to be charming in everyway, 
a bestower of all forms of success and a storehouse of blessings, I commenced writing 
this sacred story there. The impulses of lust, arrogance and hypocrisy positively 
disappear from the mind of those who hear it. One derives solace by hearing its very 
name, Ramacaritamanasa (the Manasa lake of Sri Rama’s exploits). The elephant of 
our mind, which is being scorched by the wild fire of sensuous enjoyments, is sure 
to get relief, should it drop into this lake. The holy and beautiful Ramacaritamanasa 
is the delight of sages; it was conceived by Sambhu (Lord Siva). It puts down the 
three kinds of error, sorrow and indigence* and uproots all evil practices and impurities 
of the Kali age. Having conceived it, the great Lord Siva treasured it in His mind till, 
when a favourable opportunity presented itself, He communicated it to His consort, 
Siva (ParvatT). Therefore, after due consideration Lord Hara joyously gave it the excellent 
title of Ramacaritamanasaf. I repeat the same delightful and charming story; hear it 
reverently and attentively, O noble souls. (1 — 7) 

* The three kinds of error are those relating to thought, word and deed; birth, death and old age 
constitute the three kinds of sorrow and the three kinds of indigence referred to her are: (1 ) poverty of body (2) 
poverty in men and (3) poverty of means. 

t The word ‘Manasa also denotes the mind and Lord Siva gave this story the title of ‘Ramacaritamanasa’ 
firstly because it contains a life-account of Sri Rama and secondly because He treasured it in His mind before 
communicating it to Parvatl. 




BALA-KANDA 


65 
Invoking Uma (Goddess Parvati) and Lord Siva (who has a bull emblazoned on 
His standard), I now proceed to give a full account as to what this Ramacaritamanasa 
is like, how it came to be and what led to its popularity in the world. (35) 



By the grace of Sambhu (Lord Siva) a blessed idea inspired the mind of 
Tulasidasa, which made him the author of Ramacaritamanasa. The author has polished 
his composition to the best of his intellect; yet listen to it with a sympathetic mind, O 
noble souls, and correct it. A refined (Sattvika) intellect is the catchment area, heart is 
the fathomless cavity, the Vedas and Puranas constitute the ocean; while holy men 
represent the clouds which rain down pure, sweet, agreeable and blessed water in the 
form of Sri Rama’s excellent glory. Pastimes of a personal God that such holy men narrate 
in extenso are the transparency of this water, which cleanses all impurity; while loving 
Devotion, which defies all description, represents its sweetness and coolness. This water 
is beneficial for the paddy crop in the form of virtuous deeds, it is life itself to the devotees 
of Sri Rama. The same holy water, when it dropped on the soil of the intellect, flowed 
in a volume through the beautiful channel of the ears and, collecting in the lovely spot 
called the heart, came to be stationary. Having remained there for a long time, it became 
clear, agreeable, cool and refreshing. (1 — 5) 




66 

The four most beautiful and excellent dialogues (viz., those between (i) Bhusundi 
and Garuda, (ii) Siva and Parvati (iii) Yajnavalkya and Bharadvaja and (iv) between 
Tulasidasa and other saints) that have been cleverly woven into this narrative are the 
four lovely Ghatas of this holy and charming lake. (36) 


BALA-KANDA 


67 


The seven Books are the seven beautiful flights of steps, which the soul delights 
to look upon with the eyes of wisdom; the unqualified and unbounded greatness of Sri 
Rama, which will be presently discussed, represents the unfathomable, depth of this holy 
water. The glory of Sri Rama and Sita constitutes the nectarean water; the similes 
represent the soul-ravishing sport of its wavelets. The beautiful Caupais represent the 
thick growth of lotus-plants; the various poetic devices constitute the lovely shells that 
yield beautiful pearls. The other metres, viz., Chandas, Sorathas and Dohas, are the 
cluster of charming many-coloured lotuses. The incomparable sense, the beautiful ideas 
and the elegant expression represent the pollen, honey and fragrance of those flowers 
respectively. The virtuous acts mentioned therein are the charming swarms of bees; the 
references to spiritual enlightenment, dispassion and reason represent the swan. The 
implications and involutions and the various excellences and styles of poetry are the 
lovely fishes of various kinds. The four ends of human existence, viz., worldly riches 
religious merit, enjoyment and liberation, the reasoned exposition of Jnana (Knowledge 
of God in His absolute formless aspect) and vijnana (Knowledge of qualified Divinity both 
with and without form), the nine sentiments of poetry,* and the references to Japa (the 
muttering of mystic formulae), austerity, Yoga (contemplative union with God) and 
detachment from the world — all these represent the charming aquatic creatures of this 
lake. Eulogies on virtuous men, pious souls and the Name of God — these correspond 
to water-birds of various kinds. The assemblages of saints referred to herein are the 
mango groves hemming the lake on all sides and piety has been likened to the vernal 
season. The exposition of the various types of Devotion and the references to forbearance, 
compassion and sense-control represent the canopies of creepers. Even so mind- 
control, the five Yamas or forms of self-restraint (viz., non-violence, truthfulness, non- 
thieving, continence and non-acquisition of property), the five Niyamas or religious vows 
(viz., those of external and internal purity, contentment, austerity, study of sacred books 
or repetition of the Divine Name and self-surrender to God) are the blossoms of these 
creepers; spiritual enlightenment is their fruit and loving devotion to the feet of Sri Hari 
constitutes the sap of this fruit of spiritual enlightenment: so declare the Vedas. The 
various other episodes forming part of this narrative are the birds of different colours 
such as the parrot and the cuckoo. (1 — 8) 
The thrill of joy that one experiences while listening to this narrative represents the 
flower gardens, orchards and groves; and the delight one feels is the sporting of birds; 
while a noble mind is the gardener, who waters the garden etc., with the moisture of love 
through the charming jars of eyes. (37) 
* The nine sentiments of poetry are: (1) Srrigara (the erotic sentiment or the sentiment of love) 
(2) Hasya (the humorous sentiment) (3) Karuna (the pathetic sentiment) (4) VTra (the heroic sentiment) 
(5) Raudra (the sentiment of wrath or fury) (6) Bhayanaka (the sentiment of terror) (7) BTbhatsa (the sentiment 
of disgust) (8) Santa (the sentiment of quietism) and (9) Adbhuta (the marvellous sentiment). 

68


Those who carefully recite this poem, they alone are the vigilant guardians of this 
lake. And those men and women who reverently hear it everyday are the great gods 
exercising jurisdiction over this Manasarovara lake. Sensual wretches are the accursed 
herons and crows who never approach the lake. For here there are no varied talks of 
the pleasures of sense, corresponding to snails, frogs and moss. That is why poor crows 
and herons in the form of lustful men lack the heart to visit this place. For there is much 
difficulty in getting to this place and it is not possible to reach it without the grace of Sri 
Rama. Bad company, which is so obdurate, constitutes a terribly rough road; and the 
words of such companions are so many tigers, lions and serpents. The various 
occupations and entanglements of domestic life are huge mountains which are so difficult 
to approach. Infatuation, arrogance and pride are so many inaccessible woods; and 
sophisms of various kinds are frightful streams. (1 — 5) 



The Manasa is most inaccessible to those who lack provisions for the journey in 
the shape of piety, who do not enjoy the company of saints and who have no love for 
the Lord of Raghus (Sri Rama). (38) 

69

Even if anyone makes his way to it undergoing so much hardship, he is forthwith 
attacked by ague in the shape of drowsiness. Benumbing cold in the shape of stupor 
overtakes his heart, so that the unhappy soul is deprived of a dip even after reaching 
there. Finding himself unable to take a plunge into the lake or to drink from it, he returns 
with a feeling of pride. And if anyone comes to inquire about the lake, he tries to satisfy 
him by vilifying it. All these obstacles do not, however, deter him whom Sri Rama regards 
with overwhelming kindness. He alone reverently bathes in the lake and thus escapes 
the threefold agony* of the fiercest kind. Those men who cherish ideal devotion to the 
feet of Sri Rama never quit this lake. Let him who would bathe in this lake, brother, 
diligently practise Satsahga (association with saints). Having seen the said Manasa lake 
with the mind’s eye and taken a dip into it, the poet’s intellect got purged of all its dross. 
The heart was flooded with joy and alacrity and a torrent of love and rapture welled from 
it. Thence flowed a stream of beautiful poetry, carrying the water of Sri Rama’s fair 
renown. Sarayu is the name of this river, which is the very fountain of pure bliss. The 
secular view-point and the view-point of the Vedas — these represent its two charming 
banks. This holy stream, issuing as it does from the beautiful Manasa lake, uproots in 
its course all the impurities of the Kali age, whether in the form of tiny blades of grass 
or of mighty trees. (1 — 7) 

* The three kinds of agony referred to above are: 

(i) that inflicted by other living beings (ii) that proceeding from natural causes and (iii) that caused by 
bodily or mental distemper. 

70
The three* types of audience are the towns, villages and cities on both the banks; 
and the congregation of saints is the imcomparable Ayodhya, which is the fountain of all 
auspicious blessings. (39) 
The beautiful Sarayu in the form of Sri Rama’s fair renown joined the heavenly 
stream (Gariga) of devotion to Rama. The latter was joined again by the charming stream 
of the mighty Sona in the form of the martial glory of Rama with His younger brother 
Laksmana. Intervening the two streams of Sarayu and Sona shines the celestial stream 
of Devotion blended with noble dispassion and knowledge. This triple stream, which 
scares away the threefold agony referred to above, headed towards the ocean of Sri 
Rama’s divine personality. With its source in the Manasa lake and united with the celestial 
river (Gariga), the Sarayu of Sri Rama’s fame will purify the mind of the pious souls who 
listen to it; while the strange episodes interspersed here and there are the groves and 
gardens as it were adjoining the river banks. The bridegroom’s party in the wedding of 
Goddess Uma (Parvati) and the great Lord Siva are the numberless aquatic creatures of 
various kinds. The rejoicings and felicitations that attended the advent of Sri Rama, the 
Chief of Raghus represent the charm of the eddies and waves. (1 — 4) 

* The three types of listeners referred to here may be understood to mean (i) liberated souls (ii) seekers 
of liberation and (iii) sensually-minded men. 




BALA-KANDA 


71 


The childlike sports of the four divine brothers are the, numerous lotus flowers of 
varied colours; while the stock of merits of king Dasaratha and his consorts and court 
represent the bees and water-birds. (40) 


The fascinating story of Sita’s choice — marriage is the delightful charm surrounding 
the river. The numerous pertinent questions are the boats on the river, while the 
judicious replies to the same are the skilled boatmen. The conversation that follows the 
narration of the story is the crowd of travellers moving along the river banks. The 
wrath of Parasurama (the Lord of Bhrgus) represents the furious current of this river; 
while Sri Rama’s soft words are the strongly built Ghatas on the banks. The festivities 
connected with the wedding of Sri Rama and His younger brothers represent the 
graceful swell in the river, which is a source of delight to all. Those who rejoice and 
experience a thrill of joy in narrating or hearing the story are the lucky souls who take 
an exhilarating dip in the river. The auspicious preparations that were gone through in 
connections with the installation of Sri Rama as the Yuvaraja (Prince-regent) represent 
as it were, the crowds of bathers assembled at the river bank on a sacred occasion. 
Kaikeyi’s evil counsel represents the moss on the bank, which brought a serious 
calamity in its wake. (1 — 4) 

The story of Bharata, which wards off all calamities, is a congregational muttering 
of sacred formulae carried on at the river bank; while the references to the corruptions 
of the Kali age and to the evil propensities of wicked souls represent the scum on the 
water as well as the herons and crows living by the riverside. (41) 

72

The river of Sri Rama’s glory is delightful during all the six seasons; it is exceedingly 
charming and holy at all times. The wedding of Goddess Parvati (the daughter of 
Himavan) with Lord Siva represents Hemanta or the cold season while the festival 
connected with the Lord’s advent represents the delightful Sisira or chilly season. The 
story of the preparations for Sri Rama’s wedding constitutes the vernal season* (the king 
of all seasons), which abounds in joy and felicity; while Sri Rama’s departure for the forest 
constitutes the oppressive hot seasan and the tale of His wanderings represents the 
blazing sun and hot winds. The terrible conflict with the demons represents the rainy 
season, which constituted a veritable blessing to the paddy crop in the form of gods; while 
the prosperity attending Sri Rama’s reign, His politeness and glory represent the 
cloudless, delightful and charming autumn. The recital of the virtues of Sita, the crest-jewel 
of faithful wives, constitutes the excellence of the transparent and incomparable water. 
And Bharata’s amiability represents its coolness, which is uniform at all times and beyond 
description. (1 — 4) 
The way the four brothers look at one another, talk with one another meet and love 
one another, their mirth and their ideal brotherliness — these constitute the sweetness and 

and Pausa (corresponding roughly to November and December) 
tute the cold season; Magha and Phalguna (corresponding roughly to January and February) constitute the 
chilly season; the months of Caitra and Vaisakha (corresponding roughly to March and April) constitute the 
vernal season; Jyestha and Asadha (corresponding roughly to May and June) constitute the hot weather; 
Sravana and Bhadrapada (corresponding roughly to July and August) constitute the rainy season and Asvina 
Kartika (corresponding roughly to September and October) constitute the autumnal season. 




BALA-KANDA 


73 

My intense longing, supplication and humility represent the not inconsiderable 
lightness of this pure and holy water. This marvellous water heals by the mere hearing, 
quenches the thirst of desire and washes the dirt of the mind. This water nourishes true 
love for Sri Rama and drives away all the sins of the Kali age as well as the feeling of 
self-depreciation resulting therefrom. It relieves the fatigue of transmigration, gratifies 
gratification itself and puts an end to sin, sorrow, indigence and error. It wipes out lust, 
anger, pride and infatuation and enhances pure wisdom and dispassion. By reverently 
bathing in it and drinking from it all traces of sin and remorse are obliterated from the 
heart. Those who have not washed their heart with this water are wretches that have 
been duped by the age of Kali.These creatures, wandering in pursuit of sensuous 
pleasures, will come to grief even as a thirsty deer runs after a mirage mistaking it for 
real water and returns disappointed. (1 — 4) 

Chapter 15

Having enumerated the virtues of this excellent water to the best of his intellectual 
capacity and bathed his mind in it, and remembering Goddess Bhavanl (ParvatT) and 
Lord Sankara, the poet (Tulasidasa) narrates the beautiful story. Installing in my heart 
the lotus feet of the Lord of Raghus and thus securing His grace, I now proceed to 
relate the charming story of the meeting of the two great sages (Yajnavalkya and 
Bharadvaja). (43 A-B) 
The sage Bharadvaja lives in Prayaga; he is extremely devoted to the feet of 
Sri Rama. A great ascetic and an embodiment of self-restraint, composure of mind and 
compassion, he is highly advanced on the spiritual path. In the month of Magha, when the 
sun enters the sign of Capricorn, everyone visits the chief of holy places, Prayaga. Troops 
of gods and demons, Kinnaras (demigods) and men, all devoutly bathe in the confluence of 
the Gariga, Yamuna and Sarasvati. They worship the lotus feet of God Vindumadhava (the 
presiding deity of Prayaga); and the touch of the immortal banyan tree sends a thrill into their 
limbs. The hermitage of Bharadvaja is a most sacred spot, exceedingly charming and 
attractive even to great hermits and the haunt of sages and seers who go to bathe at that 
holiest of holy places. At daybreak they all perform their ablutions with religious fervour and 
then converse together on the virtues of Sri Hari. (1 — 4) 
They discuss the nature of Brahma (the Supreme Eternal), the precepts of religion 
and the classification of fundamental entities and expatiate on Devotion to the Lord 
coupled with spiritual enlightenment and dispassion. (44) 


BALA-KANDA 


75 

In this way they bathe for the whole month of Magha and then return each to his 
hermitage. There is a great rejoicing every year and having performed their ablutions 
while the sun stays in Capricorn the hosts of sages disperse. Having bathed on one 
occasion for the whole period of the sun’s stay in Capricorn when all the great sages had 
left for their hermitages, Bharadvaja clasped by the feet and detained the supremely wise 
saint Yajnavalkya. He reverently washed the latter’s lotus feet and installed him on a 
most sacred seat. And extolling his fair renown with religious ceremony, Bharadvaja 
spoke in mild and reverential tones, “A grave doubt haunts my mind, holy sir! and the 
whole mystery of the Vedas stands revealed to you. I am afraid and ashamed to utter 
the doubt; and I lose a great opportunity if I keep it back. (1 — 4) 

“The saints lay down the rule, and the Vedas as well as the Puranas and sages 
too loudly proclaim, that pure wisdom cannot dawn in the heart, should one keep 
anything concealed from one’s spiritual preceptor.” (45) 

76

“Remembering this I disclose my folly; dispel it, taking pity on this servant, my lord! 
The saints as well as the Puranas and the Upanisads too declare that the potency of the 
name ‘Rama’ is unlimited. The immortal Lord Siva, who is the fountain of joy and a 
storehouse of wisdom and goodness, incessantly repeats It. There are four broad 
divisions of living beings in the world; such of them as die in the holy city of KasT 
(Varanasi) attain to the highest state. This too marks the glory of Sri Rama’s Name, O 
chief of sages; for it is this very Name that Lord Siva mercifully imparts to the dying soul 
in Kasi. I ask you, my lord, who that Rama is; pray explain to me, O storehouse of 
compassion. One such Rama is the prince of Ayodhya whose exploits are known 
throughout the world. Infinite was his sorrow due to the loss of his wife; and flying into 
a rage he slew Ravana in battle.” (1 — 4) 

“Is it this very, Rama, my lord, or some one else whose name the Slayer of the 
demon Tripura, Siva, ever repeats? You are an abute of truth and omniscient; so ponder well and give me your considered reply.” 

“Tell me in detail, my master, the story whereby my overwhelming perplexity may 
be overcome.” Yajnavalkya smilingly said, “The glory of the Lord of Raghus is already 
known to you. You are a devotee of Rama in thought, word and deed; I have come to 
know your ingenuity. You wish to hear an account of the hidden virtues of Rama; that 
is why you have questioned me as if you were quite ignorant. Listen, then, with devout 
attention, my child, while I narrate the beautiful story of Rama. Appalling ignorance is the 
gigantic demon Mahisasura (so-called because he was endowed with the form of a 
buffalo); while the narrative of Rama is the dread Kalika* (who made short work of the 
demon). The story of Rama is like the moonbeams that are drunk in by Cakora bird in 
the form of saints. A similar doubt was expressed by no less a personage than Bhavani 
(Goddess Parvati), and the great God Siva then expounded the matter in detail”. (1 — 4) 

Chapter 16
I shall repeat now to the best of my lights, the dialogue between Uma (Goddess 
Parvati) and Sambhu (Lord Siva). Hear, O sage, the time and the occasion of this 
dialogue; your gloom will be lifted. (47) 
Once upon a time, in the age of Treta, Lord Siva called on the jar-born sage 
Agastya. His consort, Goddess Sati, Mother of the universe, accompanied Him. The 
sage worshipped Him knowing Him to be the universal lord. The great sage narrated at 
length the story of Rama and Lord Mahesa listened to it with extreme delight. The sage 
then inquired about Devotion to Hari and Sambhu discoursed on it finding in the sage 
a fit recipient. Thus narrating and hearing the tale of Sri Rama’s virtues, the Lord of 
Kailasa (Siva) spent some days there. Finally, asking leave of the sage, the Slayer of 
the demon Tripura, Sankara, proceeded to His home (Mount Kailasa) with Daksa’s 

* The story is told in Durga-Saptasati or the Candi a work most popular with the Hindus and forming 
part of the Markandeya-Purana. 


daughter (Sati). During those very days, with a view to relieving the burden of the earth, 
Sri Hari had descended in the line of king Raghu. Renouncing His right to the Throne at 
the word of His father (Dasaratha), the immortal Lord was wandering in the Dandaka 
forest in the garb of an ascetic. (1 — 4) 

Lord Hara (Siva) kept pondering as He went, “How can I obtain a sight of Him? 
The Lord has bodied Himself forth secretly; and if I visit Him, everyone will know who 
He is.” In Sankara’s heart there was a great tumult; Sati, however, had no inkling of this 
secret. His mind, says Tulasidasa, apprehended lest the secret might be disclosed while 
the temptation of obtaining a sight of the Lord made His eyes wistful. (48 A-B) 
“Ravana (the demon king of Larika) had sought from Brahma the boon of death 
at the hands of a human foe; and the Lord would have the words of Brahma come true. 
If I do not go to meet Him, I shall ever regret it.” Siva pondered, but found no solution 
to the puzzle. The Lord was thus lost in a reverie. Meanwhile the vile Ravana (who had 
no less than ten heads) took with him the demon Marica, who forthwith assumed the 




illusory form of a deer. The fool (Ravana) carried off king Videha’s daughter (Sita) by 
fraud; the Lord’s real might was not known to him. Having killed the antelope Sri Hari 
returned with His brother (Laksmana) ; and His eyes were filled with tears when He saw 
the empty hermitage. The Lord of Raghus felt distressed at the loss like a mortal man, 
and the two brothers roamed about in the woods in search of Her. He who knows neither 
union nor separation showed unmistakable signs of grief born of separation. (1 — 4) 


Exceedingly mysterious are the ways of the Lord of Raghus; the supremely wise 
alone can comprehend them. The dull-witted in their height of folly imagine something 
quite different. (49) 

On that very occasion Sambhu saw Sri Rama and excessive joy of an 
extraordinary type welled up in His heart. He feasted His eyes on that Ocean of 
Beauty; but He did not disclose His identity as He knew it was no appropriate 
occasion for the same. The Destroyer of Cupid, Siva, passed on exclaiming “Glory to 
the Redeemer of the universe, who is all Truth, Consciousness and Bliss!” As 6iva 
went on His way with Sati, the all-merciful Lord was repeatedly thrilled with joy. When 
Sati beheld Sambhu in this state, a grave doubt arose in Her mind: “Sankara is a Lord 
of the universe Himself, and deserves universal adoration; gods, men and sages all 
bow their head to Him. Yet He made obeisance to this prince, referring to him as the 
Supreme Being who is all Truth, Consciousness and Bliss. He was enraptured to 
behold his beauty and felt an upsurge of emotion in His heart, which He was unable 
to control even to this moment!” (1 — 4) 

80

“The Supreme Eternal, which is all-pervading, unbegotten, without parts, free from 
desire, beyond Maya and beyond all distinction and which not even the Vedas can 
comprehend — can It assume the shape of a man?” (50) 
“Even Visnu Who takes a human form for the sake of gods, is omniscient like the 
Slayer of Tripura, Siva. Can He wander in search of His Consort like an ignorant man — 
He who is a repository of knowledge, the Lord of Sri (the goddess of prosperity) and the 
slayer of demons? The words of Sambhu too cannot be false. Everyone knows that He 
is all-wise.” Thus Her mind was filled with an interminable series of doubts; Her heart 
could not be pacified by any means. Although Bhavanl (Goddess ParvatT) did not open 
Her lips, Lord Hara, Who is the inner controller of all, came to know everything. “Look 
here, Sati, the woman is foremost in you; you should never harbour such a doubt in your 
mind. He is no other than Rama, the Hero of Raghu’s race, My beloved Deity, whose 
story was sung by the jar-born sage Agastya, faith in whom was the subject of the talk 
I gave to him and whom illumined sages ever wait upon.” (1 — 4) 

81

“He who has bodied Himself forth as the Jewel of Raghu’s race for the sake of 
His devotees, is no other than the Supreme Eternal, who is all-pervading and ever free, 
who is the Ruler of all the worlds and the Lord of Maya, whom illumined sages, Yogis 
(mystics) and Siddhas (adepts) constantly meditate upon with their sinless mind and 
whose glory is sung by the Vedas as well as the Puranas and other scriptures in 
negative terms as ‘not this’.” 


Although Lord Siva repeated this time after time, His exhortation made no 
impression on the heart of Sati. Then the great Lord Siva smilingly said, realizing in His 
heart the potency of Sri Hari’s Maya: — (51) 

“If you have a grave doubt in your mind, why not go and verify the thing? I shall 
be waiting in the shade of this banyan tree till you come back to Me. Using your critical 
judgment you should resort to some device whereby the stupendous error born of your 
ignorance may be rectified.” Thus obtaining leave of Siva, Sati proceeded on Her 
mission. She racked Her brains to find out what step She should take (in order to test 
the divinity of Rama). On this side Siva came to the conclusion that providenee is 
unfavaurable that is seems there is no good for Daksa’s daughter (Sati). “When her doubt 

82

did not yield even to My assurances,” He said to Himself, “it seems the stars are 
unpropitious to her and no good-will come out of it. After all, whatever Sri Rama has willed 
must come to pass; why should one add to the complication by indulging in further 
speculation?” So saying, Lord Siva began to mutter the name of Sri Hari; while Sati 
proceeded to the spot where the all-blissful Lord (Sri Rama) was. (1 — 4) 

After many an anxious thought Sati assumed the form of Sita and moved ahead 
on the same route along which the Ruler of men (Sri Rama) was passing. (52) 

When Laksmana saw Lima (Sati) in Her disguise, he was astonished and much 
puzzled. He was tongue-tied and looked very grave; the sagacious brother was 
acquainted with the Lord’s glory. All-perceiving and the inner controller of all, the lord of 
gods, Sri Rama, took no time in detecting the false appearance of Sati, Rama was the 
same omniscient Lord whose very thought wipes out ignorance. Sati sought to practise 
deception even on Him: see the impact of the nature of a woman is! Extolling in His heart 
the potency of His Maya (delusive power), Sri Rama smilingly accosted Her in a mild tone. 
Joining the palms of His hands, He first made obeisance to Her mentioning His name 
alongwith His father’s. He then asked Her the whereabouts of Lord Siva (who has a bull 
emblazoned on His standard) and wondered what made Her roam about all alone in the 
forest. (1 — 4) 

83

Sati felt very uncomfortable when She heard these soft yet suggestive words of 
Rama. She turned towards the great Lord Siva with a feeling of awe and much dejected 
at heart. (53) 

“I heeded not the word of Sankara and imposed My own ignorance on Rama. 
What reply shall I give to my lord now?” The agony of Her heart was most terrible. Sri 
Rama perceived that Sati had got vexed; He, therefore, revealed to Her a part of His 
glory. As She went on Her way Sati beheld a strange phenomenon. Rama was going 
ahead of Her alongwith His Consort, Sita, and His younger brother, Laksmana. She 
looked back and there too She saw the Lord with His brother and Sita in an attractive 
garb. Whichever way She turned Her eyes, there was the Lord enthroned and the Siddhas 
(adepts) and illumined sages ministering to Him. Sati saw many sets of Siva, Brahma and 
Visnu, each set possessing a glory infinitely greater than that of the others. She also 
beheld a whole host of gods bowing at the Lord’s feet and waiting upon Him in their 
different garbs. (1 — 4) 

She further perceived innumerable Satis (consorts of Siva), consorts of Brahma 
and Laksmis (consorts of Visnu), all peerless in beauty. They conformed in their 
appearance to the garb in which Brahma and the other gods appeared. (54) 

84

Each separate vision of Rama was attended by a whole host of gods with their 
feminine counterparts, as well as by the whole animate and inanimate creation with its 
multitudinous species. But while the gods who adored the Lord appeared in diverse 
garbs, the appearance of Sri Rama was the same in every case. Although She saw 
many Ramas with as many Sitas, their garb did not vary. Seeing the same Rama, the 
same Laksmana and the same Sita, Sati was struck with great awe. Her heart quivered, 
and She lost all consciousness of Her body. Closing Her eyes she sat down on the 
wayside. When She opened Her eyes and gazed once more, the daughter of Daksa saw 
nothing there. Repeatedly bowing Her head at the feet of Sri Rama, She proceeded to 
the spot where the Lord of Kailasa was. (1 — 4) 

When She came near, Lord Siva smilingly inquired if all was well with Her and then 
said, “Tell me now the whole truth, how did you test Sri Rama?” (55) 

BALA-KANDA 


85 
Having realized the greatness of the Hero of Raghu’s race, Sati in Her awe 
concealed the truth from Siva. “I made no test my Lord; I made obeisance just like You. 
What You said cannot be untrue; I am fully convinced in my heart.” Lord Sankara then 
looked within by contemplation and came to know all that Sati had done. Again, He 
bowed His head to the delusive power of Sri Rama, that had prompted Sati to tell a lie. 
What has been preordained by the will of Sri Hari must have its way, the all-wise 
Sambhu thought within Himself. Sati had assumed the disguise of Sita: this made Siva 
much disconsolate at heart. “If I continue to love Sati as heretofore, the cult of Devotion 
will disappear and it will be indecorous to do so.” (1 — 4) 
“Sati is too chaste to be abandoned, and it is a great sin to love her any more as 
a wife.” The great Lord Siva uttered not a word aloud, although there was great agony 
in His heart. (56) 

86

Then Sankara bowed His head at the feet of the Lord; and as soon as He invoked 
Sri Rama the idea came to His mind that He should have no connection with Sati so long 
as she continued to remain in that body. Siva resolved accordingly and having so 
resolved the stable-minded Lord Sankara proceeded towards His home (Mount Kailasa) 
with His mind fixed on the Hero of Raghu’s race. Even as He stepped forward a 
charming voice from heaven thundered forth. “Glory to the great Lord Siva, who has so 
staunchly upheld the cause of Devotion. Who else than You can take such a vow? You 
are a devotee of Sri Rama and the all-powerful Lord at the same time.” Sati felt troubled 
at heart when She heard the heavenly voice. She addressed Siva in a faltering voice, 
“Tell me, O merciful Lord! what vow You have taken. You are an embodiment of Truth 
and compassionate to the poor.” Even though Sati inquired in ways more than one, the 
Slayer of the demon Tripura, Sankara spoke not a word. (1 — 4) 


Sati concluded that the omniscient Lord had come to know everything and felt 
sorry that She had tried to deceive Sambhu. The woman is silly and stupid by nature, 
She realized. (57A) 
Even water (when mixed with milk) sells as milk; look at the unifying process of 
love. The water, however, is separated from the milk and the taste also disappears the 
moment a drop of acid is introduced into it in the form of a dees. (57B) 

87

Sati felt perturbed in Her heart at the thought of what She had done; and the 
extent of Her anxiety could neither be gauged nor described. She realized that Lord 
Siva is a supremely unfathomable ocean of mercy, hence He did not openly declare 
Her fault. From the attitude of Sankara, however, She judged that the Lord had 
abandoned Her, and felt disturbed in Her heart. Conscious of Her guilt She could not 
utter a word of protest; but all the while Her heart smouldered like a furnace. Perceiving 
the sad look of Sati, Siva (who has a bull emblazoned on His standard) narrated 
beautiful stories in order to divert Her mind. Relating various legends while on His way, 
the Lord of the universe, Siva, reached Kailasa. Then, recalling His vow, Sambhu sat 
down there under a banyan tree in the Yogic pose known as Padmasana (the pose of 
a lotus). Sankara communed with His own Self and passed into an unbroken and 
indefinitely long Samadhi (trance). (1 — 4) 
Then Sati dwelt in Kailasa, Her mind grievously sorrowing. Nobody knew anything 
about what was going on in Her mind; but the days hung heavy on Her like so many 
Yugas or ages. (58) 

Chapter 16
The grief that preyed on Sati’s mind was ever new; for She did not know when She 
would be able to cross the ocean of sorrow. “I slighted the Lord of Raghus and again took 

88

my husband’s words to be untrue; Providence has repaid me for my sins and has done 
only that which I deserved. Now, O God, it does not behove you that you should make 
me survive even after alienating me from Sankara.” The anguish of Her heart was beyond 
words. The sane lady invoked the presence of Rama in Her heart and addressed Him 
thus; “If they refer to You as compassionate to the poor and if the Vedas have glorified 
You as the dispeller of sorrow, I beseech with joined palms. O Lord, that I may be speedily 
rid of this body of mine. If I have any devotion to the feet of Siva and if I am true to my 
vow in thought, word and deed — (1 — 4) 

“Then, O all-perceiving Lord, listen to me and speedily devise some plan whereby 
I may die and be thus rid of this unbearable calamity without much exertion.” (59) 

The daughter of Daksa, Sati, thus felt very miserable. Her deep agony was terrible 
beyond words. When eighty-seven thousand years elapsed, the immortal Sambhu 
emerged from His trance. Siva started repeating the name of Rama; then Sati came to 
know that the Lord of the universe had come to the waking state. She went and bowed 
at the feet of Sambhu, Sankara gave Her a seat opposite Himself. He began to narrate 
the delightful stories of Sri Hari. Meanwhile Daksa (Sati’s father) had come to be the lord 
of created beings. On careful consideration the Creator (Brahma) found Daksa qualified 
in everyway and appointed him as the supreme lord of created beings. When Daksa 
attained this high position, the pride of his heart knew no bounds. Never was a creature 
born in this world, whom power did not intoxicate. (1 — 4) 

89

Daksa got together all the sages and he began to perform a big sacrifice. All the 
gods who obtain a share of the oblations offered at a sacrifice were cordially invited to 
attend. (60) 

Kinnaras (a species of demigods), Nagas, Siddhas (a class of celestial beings) 
and Gandharvas (celestial songsters) and the whole host of gods proceeded to the 
sacrifice alongwith their wives. All the gods with the exception of Visnu, Viranci (the 
Creator) and the great Lord Siva, set out in their aerial cars. Sati beheld beautiful aerial 
cars of various patterns coursing through the air. Celestial damsels were singing 
melodious strains, which intruded upon the ears of ascetics and broke their meditation. 
When Sati inquired about the stir in the air, Siva explained the whole thing. She was 
somewhat delighted to hear of the sacrifice, commenced by Her father and thought of 
making it an excuse for staying a few days with Her father in case the great Lord Siva 
granted Her leave. Repudiation by Her lord tormented Her heart not a little; but conscious 
of Her guilt She would not utter a word. At last Sati spoke in a charming voice tinged with 
awe, misgiving and affection — (1 — 4) 

90

“There is great rejoicing at my father’s house, O Lord. If You grant me leave, I 
would fain go and see it, O storehouse of compassion.” (61) 

Lord Siva replied, “Your suggestion is good and has commended itself to Me as 
well. But the anomaly is that Your father has sent no invitation to us. Daksa has invited 
all his other daughters; but because of the grudge he bears to us you too have been 
ignored. In the court of Brahma he once took offence at my behaviour; that is why he 
insults us even now. If you go there uninvited, Bhavanl, all decorum, affection and honour 
will be cast to the winds. It is no doubt true one should call on one’s friend, master, father 
or teacher without waiting for a formal invitation; yet where someone nurses a grudge 
against you, you reap no good by going there.” Sambhu expostulated with Sati in so 
many ways; but as fate had willed it, wisdom would not dawn on Her. The Lord repeated 
once more that if She went to Her father’s place uninvited. He anticipated no good 
results from it. (1 — 4) 
Having reasoned with Her in ways more than one when Hara at last perceived 
that the daughter of Daksa was not going to stay, the Slayer of Tripura detailed a few 
of His principal attendants as Her escort and sent Her away. (62) 


Chapter 17
When Bhavanl (etymologically, the Consort of Bhava, an epithet of Siva) reached 
Her father’s house, no one greeted Her for fear of incurring Daksa’s displeasure. Her 
mother was the solitary figure who met Her kindly. Her sisters received Her with profuse 
smiles. Daksa would not even inquire about Her health; he burnt all over with rage at 
the very sight of Sati. Sati then went to have a look at the sacrifice; but nowhere did She 
find any share of oblations set apart for Sambhu.Then did She realize the force of 
Sankara’s warning; Her heart burnt within Her at the thought of the insult offered to Her 
lord.The former grief (that of repudiation by Her lord) did not torment Her heart so much 
as the great agony She now felt (as a result of the insult offered to Her husband). 
Although there are terrible agonies of various kinds in this world, the insult offered to 
one’s own people is the most painful of them all. The thought of the same made Sati 
furious. Her mother tried to pacify Her in many ways. (1 — 4) 


The insult to Siva was something unbearable; Her heart could not, therefore, 
be pacified. Then, sharply reproaching the whole assembly, She spoke in angry 
accents: — (63) 

92

“Hear ye elders of the assembly and all great sages! All of you who have reviled 
Sankara or heard Him reviled must forthwith reap the fruit of your sin and My father 
too shall fully repent. Wherever you hear a saint, Sambhu or Visnu (the Lord of Laksmi) 
vilified, the rule is that if it lies within your power you should tear out the tongue of the 
reviler or you should run away closing your ears. The Slayer of Tripura, the great Lord 
Siva, is the universal Spirit; He is the father of the universe and is beneficent to all. It 
is Him that my stupid father vilifies; and this body of Mine has sprung from the loins 
of Daksa. Therefore, installing in My heart Lord Siva, who bears the moon on His 
forehead and a bull as His emblem, I shall immediately quit this body.” As She spoke 
thus She burnt Her body with the fire of Yoga.* A plaintive cry rose from the whole 
assembly. (1 — 4) 

Hearing of Sati’s death, the attendants of Sambhu began to destroy the sacrifice. 
Seeing the sacrifice being destroyed, the great sage Bhrgu protected it. (64) 


* Fire produced by Yogis through the friction of the vital airs within the body. 




BALA-KANDA 


93 


Sankara got all the news and in His wrath He sent Virabhadra. Going there the 
latter made havoc of the sacrifice and requited all the gods according to their deserts. As 
is well-known to the world, Daksa met the same fate which an opponent of Sambhu 
generally meets. The story is known throughout the world; that is why I have told it in 
brief. While dying, Sati asked a boon of Sri Hari that She might remain devoted to the 
feet of Siva in all successive births.That is why She was reborn as Parvati (lit. .daughter 
of a mountain) in the house of Himacala (the deity presiding over the Himalaya 
mountain). Ever since Lima was born in the house of Himalaya the mountain became an 
abode of all blessings and prosperity. Sages built beautiful hermitages here and there 
and Himalaya assigned them suitable abodes (in the form of caves etc.). (1 — 4) 
Young trees of different varieties were endowed with never failing blossoms and 
fruits, and mines of jewels of various kinds appeared on the beautiful mountain. (65) 


All the rivers bore holy waters; birds, beasts and bees, all rejoiced. All animals 
gave up their natural antipathies and all those who dwelt on the mountain loved one 
another. With the advent of Girija (a synonym of Parvati) the mountain (Himalaya) wore 
a cheerful look even as devotion to Sri Rama lights up the face of a devotee. Everyday 
brought a new delight to the house of Himacala, whose glory was sung even by great 
gods like Brahma (the Creator). Receiving all the news Narada eagerly went to the 
house of Himacala. The king of mountains (the presiding deity of the Himalayas), 
received him with great honour; washing the sage’s feet he led him to a beautiful seat. 
He bowed his head at the sage's feet alongwith his wife and had his whole mansion
sprinkled with the water hallowed by his feet. Himacala extolled his own good luck and, 
summoning his daughter, placed her at the sage’s feet. (1 — 4) 


“You know everything, including the past, present and future, and have access 
everywhere. Therefore, O good sage, tell me what is good and what is bad about my 
daughter after a mature consideration.” (66) 


The sage smilingly replied in the following soft yet significant words: “Your 
daughter is a mine of all virtues — pretty, amiable and intelligent by nature. She will be 
called Uma, Ambika (lit., mother) and Bhavani. Adorned with all good traits, the girl shall 
win the unfailing love of her husband. She shall remain ever united with her lord and bring 
glory to her parents. She shall command the respect of the whole universe; he who waits 
upon her shall lack nothing. By the mere thought of her name women in this world shall 
be enabled to tread the path of fidelity to their lord, which is sharp as the edge of a sword. 
Your daughter, O Himalaya, is endowed with auspicious marks. Hear now the few 
drawbacks she possesses. Devoid of merits, free from pride, without father or mother, 
unconcerned and free from doubts — (1 — 4) 


BALA-KANDA 


95 


“An ascetic with matted hair and a heart devoid of longing, stark naked and with 
hideous accoutrements — such a one shall be her lord, as I can read from the lines on 
her palm.” (67) 
Chapter 18
Hearing the words of the sage and believing them to be true, Himalaya and his 
wife became disconsolate; while Uma felt delighted. Even Narada could not perceive this 
difference. Even though their outer expression was the same, their feeling was different, 
Girija and all her playmates, Himalaya and his wife, Mena, all had their hair standing on 
their end and their eyes were full of tears. The words of the celestial sage Narada could 
not be untrue: Uma cherished them in her heart. Love for the lotus feet of Siva sprouted 
in her heart. She however, felt diffident in her mind; union with Siva appeared so difficult 
to her. Finding the time inopportune for its disclosure, she concealed her emotion and 
then sat down in the lap of one of her playmates. The prediction of the sage could not be 
false: the thought made Himavan and his wife as well as the senior playmates anxious. 
Collecting himself, the lord of mountains said, “Tell me, holy sir, what remedy should now 
be employed?” (1 — 4) 

The chief of sages, Narada, replied: “Hear, O Himavan; whatever has been 
decreed by Fate no one can undo — not even gods, demons, human beings, Nagas or 
sages. (68) 

96


“Nevertheless I tell you one remedy: this may avail if Heaven helps you. Uma will 
undoubtedly get such a husband as I have described to you. But whatever demerits I 
have shown in her bridegroom exist in Siva so far as I can guess. If her marriage takes 
place with Sankara, everyone will call the demerits as good as virtues. Even though Sri 
Hari uses the serpent-god Sesa as His couch and sleeps thereon, the wise do not blame 
Him for the same. Even so the sun and fire absorb moisture in all forms, but no one calls 
them names. Again, water of every description, pure as well as impure, flows into the 
Gariga; yet no one calls the heavenly stream impure. Even like the sun, fire and the 
Gariga, the mighty incur no blame.” (1 — 4) 



“If in their pride of wisdom foolish men emulate the great, they are cast into 
hell for a whole Kalpa or life-time of the universe. Can an embodied soul vie with 
God?” (69) 

97

“Holy men would never drink wine even if they came to know that it had been made 
of water from the Gariga; but the same wine becomes pure when it is poured into the 
Gariga. The difference between an individual soul and God should be similarly explained. 
Sambhu is all-powerful by nature; for He is no other than God Himself. Hence matrimony 
with Him will prove auspicious in everyway. The great Lord Siva is certainly difficult to 
propitiate; but He is quickly pleased when penance is undergone. If your daughter 
practises austerity, the Slayer of the demon Tripura, Siva, can even erase the lines of 
Fate. Even though there may be many potential groom in the world, there is no match 
for her except Siva. He is the bestower of boons, the dispeller of the agony of the 
suppliant, an ocean of benevolence and the delight of His devotee. Without propitiating 
Siva the object of one’s desire cannot be attained through millions of Yogic practices and 
Japa (repetitions of a mystic formula).” (1 — 4) 

So saying and with his thoughts fixed on Sri Hari, Narada gave his blessings to 
Girija and said, “Shed all fear, O lord of mountains; all will now turn out well.” (70) 

98

Having spoken thus, the sage returned to the abode of Brahma (the Creator). Now 
hear the end of the story how it came about. Finding her husband alone, Maina 
(Himalaya’s wife) said to him, “My lord, I could not follow the words of the sage. If the 
match, his house and his pedigree are without parallel and worthy of our daughter, the 
marriage may be concluded. If not, the girl had better remain unmarried; for, my lord, Uma 
is dear to me as my own life. If we fail to secure a match worthy of Girija, everyone will 
say Himalaya is dull by nature. Keep this in mind, my lord, while concluding an alliance, 
so that there may be no cause for repentance.” Having spoken these words Maina laid 
herself prostrate with her head at the feet of her lord. The lord of mountains, Himalaya, 
replied in endearing terms, “Sooner shall the moon way emit flames of fire but the 
prophecy of Narada should prove untrue.” (1 — 4) 



“Put away all anxiety, my dear, and fix your thoughts on the Lord. He alone who 
has created Parvati, will bring her happiness.” (71) 



“Now if you cherish any love for your child, then go and admonish her that she 
should practise austerity which may bring about her union with Siva: there is no other 
way of overcoming sorrow. The words of Narada are pregnant and full of reason. Siva 
(who bears a bull for His emblem) is handsome and a mine of all virtues: recognizing 
this truth do not entertain any misgiving. Sankara is irreproachable in everyway.” 
Hearing the above words of her husband Maina felt delighted at heart; she at once rose 
and went where Girija was. At the sight of Uma tears rushed to her eyes and she 
affectionately took the girl in her lap. Again and again she hugged the child; her voice 




BALA-KANDA 


99 


was choked with emotion and she found herself tongue-tied. The Mother of the universe, 
the all-knowing Bhavani, then spoke the following soft words, which brought delight to 
her mother: — (1 — 4) 



“Listen, mother: I relate to you a vision which I saw. A handsome and fair- 
complexioned noble Brahmana gave me the following exhortation.” (72) 

Chapter 19
“Recognizing the truth of Narada’s words go and practise austerity, O mountain- 
maid; the idea has commended itself to your father and mother as well. Austerity is conducive 
to joy and puts an end to sorrow and evils. By virtue of penance the Creator creats the 
universe. By virtue of penance Visnu protects the whole world. By virtue of penance Sambhu 
brings about dissolution. By virtue of penance, again, Sesa (the serpent-god) bears the 
burden of the earth on his head. In fact, the entire creation rests on penance, Bhavani. 
Bearing this in mind, go and practise austerity.” Hearing these words the mother was filled 
with wonder. She sent for Himalaya and communicated the vision to him. Consoling her 
parents in many ways Uma set out for penance in a joyous mood. Her loving household 
and parents felt miserable and none could speak a word. (1 — 4) 

100

The sage Vedasira then came and consoled them all. They were comforted when 
they heard of the glory of Parvati. (73) 

Chapter 20
Cherishing in her heart the feet of her dear lord, Uma went to the forest and 
began her penance. Her delicate frame was little fit for austerities; yet she renounced 
all luxuries fixing her mind on the feet of her lord. Her devotion to the feet of her lord 
presented a new phase everyday; and she got so absorbed in penance that she lost 
all consciousness of her body. For a thousand years she lived on roots and fruits 
alone; while for another hundred years she subsisted on vegetables. For some days 
her only sustenance was water and air; while for a few days she observed a rigorous 
fast. For three thousand years she maintained herself on the withered leaves of the 
Bela* tree that dropped on the ground. Finally she gave up even dry leaves; Uma 
then came to be known by the name of Aparna (living without leaves). Seeing her 
body emaciated through self-mortification the deep voice of Brahma (the Creator) 
resounded through the heavens: — (1 — 4) 

“Listen, O daughter of the mountain-king; your desire is accomplished. Cease all 
your rigorous penance; the Slayer of Tripura will soon be yours.” (74) 
* The Bela tree (Aegle marmelos) is specially sacred to Siva. 



“There have been many self-possessed and illumined sages; but not one of them, 
Bhavanl, performed such penance as this. Now cherish in your heart this supreme 
utterance from heaven, knowing it to be invariably true and ever sacred. When your 
father comes to call you, give up all resistance and return home at once. Again, when 
the seven sages meet you, be assured of the veracity of this oracle.” Girija (the daughter 
of Himavan) rejoiced to hear this utterance of Brahma echoed by heaven and a thrill ran 
through her limbs. [Yajnavalkya says to Bharadvaja] I have thus sung the beautiful story 
of Lima; now hear the charming account of Sambhu. Ever since Sati went and quitted 
her body, Siva’s mind recoiled from everything. He ever repeated the name of the Lord 
of Raghus and heard the recitation of Sri Rama’s glories here and there. (1 — 4) 
The embodiment of intelligence and bliss, the abode of happiness, Siva, who is 
ever free from error, arrogance and desire, roamed about on earth with His heart fixed 
on Sri Hari, the delight of the whole world. (75) 


Chapter 21
Here He instructed the sages in wisdom and there He extolled the virtues of 
Sri Rama. Though passionless and all-wise, the Lord was smitten with the pangs of 
separation from His devotee (Sati). In this way a considerable time elapsed. Devotion 
to the feet of Sri Rama was ever budding in His heart. When Sri Rama saw the self- 
discipline and affection of Sankara and the indelible stamp of devotion on His heart, 
the merciful Lord, who fully recognizesservices rendered to Him, and is a mine of beauty 
and amiability and an embodiment of great splendour, appeared before Sankara and 
extolled Him in ways more than one. “Who else than You can accomplish such a 
vow?” He said, Sri Rama admonished Him in many ways and told Him of the birth 
of Parvati. The Lord in His infinite compassion narrated at full length the most pious 
doings of Girija. (1 — 4) 

“Now, Siva, if You have any affection for Me, listen to My appeal. Go and marry 
Sailaja (the daughter of Himacala): grant this boon to Me.” (76) 

103

Siva replied, “Although this is hardly justifiable, the words of a master cannot be 
set aside at the same time. My lord, your command must be respectfully carried out: this 
is my paramount duty. The words of one’s parents, teacher and master must be 
unquestionably obeyed as conducive to bliss. You are my supreme benefactor in 
everyway; therefore, my lord, I bow to Your commands.” The Lord, was pleased to hear 
the well-chosen words of Sankara; which were inspired with devotion, wisdom and piety. 
The Lord said, “Your vow has been kept; now bear in mind what I have told You.” Saying 
so He went out of sight. Sankara cherished the impression of the vision in His heart. That 
very moment the seven sages called on Siva. The Lord spoke to them in most charming 
accents: — (1 — 4) 

“Going to Parvati, you put her love to the test. Then directing her father, Himalaya, 
to her, send her back to her home and dispel her doubts.” (77) 


There the seers saw Gauri (a name of Parvati; lit., fair-complexioned) as if she 
were penance itself personified.The sages said, “Hear, O daughter of Himacala: why 
are you practising such rigorous penance? Whom do you worship and what do you 
seek? Why not confide to us the real secret?” “I feel very shy in making my 
submission. You will be amused to hear of my folly. Yet my mind has taken a rigid 
attitude and heeds no advice; it would raise a wall on water. Relying on the truth of 
Narada’s prophecy, I long to fly even without wings. Look at my madness; I always 
covet Siva as my husband.” (1 — 4) 

104

Hearing the above reply the sages laughed and said, “After all your body owes its 
existence to a mountain (Himalaya); tell us who could live in his home whoever listened 
ti Narada’s advice.” (78) 

“He called on and admonished the sons of Daksa and they never saw their home 
again. It was he who ruined the home of Citraketu; and again Hiranyakasipu (the father 
of Prahlada) met a similar fate. Men and women who listen to Narada’s advice are sure 
to leave their home and become mendicants. Guileful at heart, he bears on his person 
the marks of a pious man; he would make everyone just like himself. Relying on his 
words you crave for a husband who is apathetic by nature, devoid of attributes, 
shameless, homeless and naked, who has an inauspicious look about him, wears a 
string of skulls around his neck, is without a family and has serpents for his ornaments. 
Tell us, what happiness do you expect by obtaining such a husband? You have fallen 
an easy prey to the machinations of that imposter! Siva married Sati at the intercession 
of some friends; but later on he abandoned her and left her to die.” (1 — 4) 


“Siva is care-free now; he lives on alms and enjoys a sound sleep. Can women 
ever stay in the house of habitual recluses?” (79) 

105

“Even now accept our advice; we have thought of an excellent match for you — 
exceptionally good-looking, pious, agreeable and amiable, whose glory and exploits are 
sung by the Vedas. He is free from blemish, is a mine of all virtues and the lord of Laksmi 
(the goddess of prosperity) and has His abode in Vaikuntha. Such a suitor we shall unite 
with you.” Hearing this, Bhavani laughed and said, “You have rightly observed that this 
body of mine is begotten of a rock: I would sooner die than give up my tenacity. Gold 
is another product of rock which does not abandon its character even on being 
consigned to fire. I may not ignore Narada’s advice; whether my house is full or desolate, 
I fear not. He who has no faith in the words of his preceptor, cannot easily attain either 
happiness or success even in a dream.” (1 — 4) 

“The great God Siva may be full of demerls and Visnu may be a repository of all 
virtues. One is, however, concerned with him alone who gladdens one’s heart.” (80) 

106
“Had you met me earlier, O great sages! I would have listened to your advice with 
reverence. But now that I have staked my life for Sambhu, who will weigh His merits and 
demerits? If you are specially bent upon uniting a pair and cannot help negotiating a 
match, there is no dearth of suitors and maidens; and those who take delight in such 
games know no weariness. As for myself I must wed Sambhu or remain a virgin, no 
matter if I have to continue the struggle for ten million lives. I will not disregard Narada’s 
admonition even if Sambhu Himself tells me a hundred times to do so.” “I fall at your feet,” 
continued Parvati, the Mother of the universe, “Please return to your home. It is already 
late.” Seeing Parvati’s devotion the enlightened sages exclaimed, “Glory, all glory to You, 
O Bhavani, Mother of the universe!” (1 — 4) 

“You are Maya, while Siva is God Himself; You are the parents of the whole 
universe.” Bowing their head at the feet of Parvati, they departed. A thrill ran through their 
frame again and again. (81) 

107

The sages went and despatched Himavan to Girija and he with many entreaties 
brought her home. The seven seers then called on Siva and told Him the whole history 
of Uma. Siva was enraptured to hear of her love; and the Saptarsis gladly went home. 
The all-wise Sambhu then concentrated His mind and began to meditate on the Lord of 
Raghus. A demon, Taraka by name, flourished in those days; his strength of arm, glory 
and majesty were great indeed. He conquered all the spheres as well as the guardians 
of those spheres; all the gods were robbed of their happiness and prosperity. Knowing 
neither age nor death, he was invincible. The gods fought many a battle with him and lost 
them. They then went to Viranci (Brahma) and told him their grievances. The Creator 
found all the gods miserable. (1 — 4) 
Brahma reassured them all saying, “The demon shall die only when there is a son 
sprung from the loins of Sambhu; for he alone can subdue the demon in battle.” (82) 
“Hearing what I say, act accordingly; God will help you and the plan will succeed. 
Sati, who left her body at the sacrifice performed by Daksa, has been born again in the 
house of Himacala. She has undergone penance for winning the hand of Sambhu; while 
Siva has renounced everything and sits absorbed in contemplation. Although it is most 
unseemly, yet hear one proposal of mine. Approaching Cupid (the god of love), send him 
to Siva; and let him disturb the serenity of Sankara’s mind. Then we shall go and bow 
our head at Siva’s feet and prevail on Him to marry even against His will. In this way alone 
may the interests of the gods be served.” “The idea is excellent,” everyone said. The gods 




108 
then prayed with great devotion and the god of love, armed with five* arrows and having 
a fish emblazoned on his standard, appeared on the scene. (1 — 4) 

The gods told him all their distress; hearing their tale, the god of love pondered 
and spoke thus with a smile, “I expect no good results for myself from hostility to 
Sambhu.” (83) 

“However, I shall do your work; for the Vedas say benevolence is the highest 
virtue. The saints ever praise him who lays down his life in the service of others.” So 
saying, the god of love bowed his head to all and departed with his associates, the bow 
of flowers in hand. While leaving, Love thought within himself that hostility to Siva would 
mean sure death to him. He then exhibited his power and brought the whole world under 
his sway. When the god of love (who bears a fish for his emblem) betrayed his anger, 
all the barriers imposed by the Vedas were swept away in a moment. The whole army 
of Viveka (discriminating knowledge) — continence, religious vows, self-restraint of many 
kinds, fortitude, piety, spiritual wisdom and the knowledge of qualified divinity both with 
form and without form, morality, muttering of prayers, Yoga (contemplative union with 
God), dispassion and so on, fled in panic. (1 — 4) 
* The white lotus, the Asoka flower, the mango blossom, the jasmine and the blue lotus — these are the 
five kinds of arrows with which the god of love is believed to be armed. 

109


Viveka took to flight with his associates; his great warriors turned their back on 
the field of battle. They all went and hid themselves in mountain-caves in the form of 
sacred books at that time. There was commotion in the world and everybody said, “My 
goodness, what is going to happen? What power will save us? Who is that superhuman 
being with two heads to conquer whom the lord of Rati,* Love, has lifted his bow and 
arrows in rage?” 

Whatever creatures existed in the world, whether animate or inanimate and 
bearing masculine or feminine appellations transgressed their natural bounds and were 
completely possessed by lust. (84) 

Chapter 22
The minds of all were seized with lust; the boughs of trees bent low at the sight 
of creepers. Rivers in spate rushed to meet the ocean; lakes and ponds united in love 
with one another. Where such was reported to be the case with the inanimate creation, 


The name of Love’s wife. 


who can relate the doings of sentient beings? Beasts that walk on land and birds 
traversing the air, and water lost all sense of time and became victims of lust. The whole 
world was blinded with passion and agitated. The Cakravaka birds (ruddy geese)* 
regarded neither day nor night. Gods, demons, human beings, Kinnaras (a class of demi- 
gods), serpents, evil spirits, fiends, ghosts and vampires — I have refrained from dwelling 
on the condition of these, knowing them to be eternal slaves of passion. Even Siddhas 
(spiritual adepts), great sages who had no attraction for the world and Yogis (mystics) 
gave up their Yoga (contemplative union with God) under the influence of lust. (1 — 4) 

Even great Yogis and ascetics were completely possessed by lust, to say nothing 
of low-minded people? Those who till lately looked upon the animate and inanimate 
creation as full of Brahma (God) now saw it as full of the fair sex. Women perceived the 
whole world as full of men; while the latter beheld it as full of women. For nearly an hour 
this wonderful game of Love lasted in the universe. 

Nobody could remain self-possessed; the hearts of all were stolen by the god of 
love. They alone could hold their own against him, to whom the Hero of Raghu’s race 
extended His protection. (85) 

* The red gander and goose are said to unite only during the daytime. They cannot meet at night even 
if there is no physical barrier between them. During the brief span of time referred to above they ignored this 
natural bar and met even during the night. 

111
Chapter 23
The wonder, lasted for an hour or so till the god of love reached Sarhbhu. Cupid 
trembled at the sight of Siva; the whole world returned to itself. All living beings regained 
their peace of mind at once, even as the intoxicated feel relieved when their spell of 
drunkenness is over. The god of love was struck with terror at the sight of Bhagavan Rudra 
(Siva), who is so difficult to conquer and so hard to comprehend. He felt shy in retreating 
and was incapable of doing anything; ultimately he resolved upon death and devised a 
plan. He forthwith manifested the lovely spring, the king of all seasons; rows of young 
trees laden with flowers appeared so charming. Woods and groves, wells and ponds and 
all the quarters of heaven assumed a most delightful aspect. Everywhere nature overflowed 
with love as it were; the sight aroused passion even in dead souls. (1 — 4) 

Passion was aroused even in dead souls and the beauty of the forest beggared 
description. A cool, gentle and fragrant breeze fanned the fire of passion as a faithful 
companion. Rows of lotuses blossomed in lakes and swarms of charming bees hummed 
on them. Swans, cuckoos and parrots uttered their sweet notes; while celestial damsels 
sang and danced. 
The god of love with his army of followers exhausted all his numberless stratagems; 
Siva’s unbroken trance, however, could not be disturbed. This made Cupid angry. (86) 

112

Seeing a beautiful bough of a mango tree, the god of love climbed up to it in a mood 
of frustration. He joined his five arrows to his bow of flowers, and casting an angry look 
drew the string home to his very ears. He discharged the five sharp arrows, which smote 
the breast of Siva. The trance was now broken and Sambhu awoke. The Lord’s mind was 
much agitated. Opening His eyes He looked all round. When He saw Cupid hiding behind 
mango leaves, He flew into a rage, which made all the three spheres tremble. Siva then 
uncovered His third eye; the moment He looked at the god of love the latter was reduced 
to ashes. A loud wail went up through the universe. The gods were alarmed, while the 
domons were gratified. The thought of (loss of) sense-delights made the voluptuary sad; 
while the striving Yogis were relieved of a thorn as it were. (1 — 4) 


The Yogis were freed from torment; while Rati (wife of the god of love) fainted as 
soon as she heard of the fate of her lord. Weeping and wailing and mourning in various 
ways she approached Sankara; and making loving entreaties in divergent ways she stood 
before the Lord with clasped hands. Seeing the helpless woman, the benevolent Lord 
Siva, who is so easy to placate, prophesied as follows: — 
113

“Henceforth, O Rati, your husband shall be called by the name of Anariga 
(bodiless); he shall dominate all even without a body. Now hear how you will meet him 
again. (87) 

“When Sri Krsna will descend in the line of Yadu to relieve the earth of its heavy 
burden, your lord will be born again as His son (Pradyumna); this prediction of Mine can 
never be untrue.” Hearing the words of Sankara, Rati went away. I now proceed to relate 
the subsequent part of the story. When Brahma (the Creator) and the other gods 
received all the tidings, they repaired to Vaikuntha (the abode of God Visnu). Thence all 
the gods, including Visnu and Viranci (Brahma), went where the all-merciful Siva was. 
They severally extolled and won the pleasure of the Lord whose crest is adorned by the 
crescent. Siva, who is an ocean of compassion and has a bull emblazoned on His 
standard, said, “Tell me, immortals, what has brought you here?” To this Brahma replied, 
“Lord, You are the inner controller of all; even then, my master, my devotion to You urges 
me to make the following submission — (1 — 4) 

“The heart of all the immortals is seized with a dominating impulse. They long to 
witness Your wedding with their own eyes, my lord. (88) 

114

“O humbler of the pride of Love! Devise some means whereby we may be enabled 
to feast our eyes on this glad event. Having burnt the god of love You have done well 
in granting a boon to Rati, O ocean of compassion. Having meted out punishment, good 
masters shower their grace as a matter of course: such is their natural habit. Parvati has 
practised penance the magnitude of which cannot be estimated; kindly accept her now.” 
Hearing the entreaty of Brahma and remembering the words of the Lord (Sri Rama), Siva 
gladly said, “Amen!” The gods thereupon sounded their kettledrums; and raining down 
flowers they exclaimed, “Victory, victory to the Lord of celestials!” Considering it to be 
an opportune moment, the seven seers arrived on the scene. Brahma immediately sent 
them to the abode of Himavan. They approached Bhavani in the first instance and 
addressed the following sweet yet deceptive words to her: — (1 — 4) 

“Relying on the advice of Narada you would not heed our remonstrances then. 
Your vow has failed now; for the great Lord Siva has burnt the god of love!” (89) 

115


Hearing this, Bhavanl smiled and said, “0 great and illumined sages, you have spoken 
aright. According to your belief it is only now that Sambhu has burnt the god of love and that 
till now He was smitten with love. To my mind, however, Siva is eternally in rapport with the 
Infinite, unbegotten, irreproachable, passionless and given to sensual in . Knowing Him as 
such, if I have served Him lovingly in thought, word and deed, then hear, O great sages: the 
gracious Lord will accomplish my vow. Your statement that Hara has burnt the god of love 
betrays woeful lack of thought in you. my dear Fire, possesses this inherent property that 
frost can never approach it: in case it does it must inevitably perish. Similar is the case with 
the god of love and the great Lord Siva. (1 — 4) 

Hearing the words of Bhavanl and perceiving her devotion and faith, the sages 
were gladdened at heart. Bowing their head to Her, they went to Himavan. (90) 

116
Chapter 24

They related the whole episode to him and he was much grieved to hear how Siva 
had burnt Love. The sages then told him of the boon granted to Rati and Himavan was 
much relieved to learn this. Recalling to his mind the glory of Sambhu Himacala 
respectfully summoned great sages. He had an auspicious date, asterism and hour 
ascertained and without delay got the exact time of wedding fixed and noted down 
according to the Vedic precepts. Himacala handed over the note recording the exact time 
of wedding to the seven seers, and clasping their feet made entreaties to them. Calling 
on Brahma they delivered the note to him; and as he went through it his heart overflowed 
with joy. Brahma read the note aloud to all; the sages as well as the whole concourse 
of gods was delighted to hear it. Flowers were showered from the air, music flowed from 
various instruments and auspicious jars were placed in all directions. (1 — 4) 


All the gods began to adorn their vehicles and aerial cars of various kinds; happy 
and auspicious omens were visible and celestial damsels sang for joy. (91) 


The attendants of Sambhu began to adorn their lord. His matted locks were formed 
into a crown and decked with a crest of serpents. He had serpents for His ear-rings and 
bracelets, smeared His person with ashes and wrapped a lion’s skin round His loins. 
He bore the crescent on His charming aest and the river Gariga on the crown of His head 
and had three eyes and a serpent for the sacred thread. His throat was black with the 
poison swallowed by him at the beginning of creation and had a wreath of human skulls 
about His neck. Thus clad in a ghastly attire, He was nonetheless an embodiment of 




BALA-KANDA 


117 


blessings and merciful to the core. A trident and a Damaru (a shall drum shaped like an 
hour-glass) adorned His hands. Siva rode on a bull while musical instruments played. 
Female divinities smiled to see Him. “The world has no bride worthy of the bridegroom,” 
They said to one another. Visnu, Brahma and hosts of other gods joined the bridegroom’s 
procession and rode on their respective vehicles. The gathering of the immortals was 
incomparable in every respect; the procession, however, was hardly worthy of the 
bridegroom. (1 — 4) 

God Visnu then called all the guardians of the different quarters and smilingly said, 
“Everyone of you should march separately, each with his own retinue. (92) 


“The procession, brothers, is no way worthy of the bridegroom; you will make 
yourself a butt of ridicule in a strange city!” Hearing the words of Visnu, the gods smiled 
and parted, each with his own group. The great Lord Siva laughed in His sleeves and 
noticed that Sri Hari’s humour never failed. As soon as He heard these most pleasing 
remarks of His beloved friend, He sent Bhrrigi to call all His attendants. And they all 
came when they heard Siva’s command and bowed their head at the lotus feet of their 
lord. Siva laughed to see His host in their motley attire riding every kind of vehicle. Some 
were headless, while others were hydra-headed monsters; some were without hands 
and feet, while others had numerous hands and feet. Some had numerous eyes, while 
others had no eyes at all; some were stout and well-built, while others had very slim 
bodies. (1 — 4) 




118 

Some had lean and thin bodies, while others were very stout; some were tidy, 
while others had dirty habits. They had frightful ornaments, carried skulls in their hands 
and were all smeared with fresh blood. They bore heads of donkeys, dogs, swine and 
jackals and the varieties of their appearan as could not be counted. The troops of spirits, 
goblins and fairies of various kinds beggared description. 


The ghosts danced and sang; they were all extremely fantastic. They looked most 
absurd and spoke words in a peculiar style. (93) 

The procession was now quite worthy of the bridegroom; the processionists 
indulged in gaieties of various kinds as they went along. On the other side Himacala 




BALA-KANDA 


119 


erected a most wonderful pavilion which beggared description. As many mountains as 
existed in the world, small or big, more than man can count, and the whole host of 
woods, seas, rivers and ponds* were all invited by Himacala. Capable of taking any form 
they liked, they assumed handsome figures and repaired to the house of Himalaya 
alongwith their retinues and fair consorts. They all sang festive songs out of affection. 
The mountain-king had already caused a number of houses to be tastefully decorated; 
all the guests were lodged therein, each occupying a house befitting one’s status. The 
splendour of the city was so captivating that after a glance at it the creative skill of 
Brahma himself looked very insinificant. (1 — 4) 



A glance at the beautiful city made the creative art of Brahma himself pale into 
insignificance. Groves and gardens, wells and ponds and rivers, all looked charming 
beyond words. Every house was decorated with a number of triumphal arches, flags and 
buntings. Men and women of the city were so lovely and ingenious that they enraptured 
the hearts even of sages. 


The city in which the Mother of the universe had bodied Herself forth baffled 
all description. Prosperity and success, wealth and happiness were always on the 
increase there and presented a new aspect. (94) 


* According to the Hindu scriptures every natural object is believed to be presided over by a spirit; it 
is these spirits that are referred to here. 

120
Chapter 25
When it was heard that the bridegroom’s procession was close at hand, there was 
commotion in the city, which added to its charm. Adorning themselves and decorating 
their vehicles of various kinds, a party proceeded in advance to receive the procession 
with due honour. They were gladdened at heart to see the gathering of the immortals. 
And they were all the more happy to behold Sri Hari (Visnu). But when they started 
looking at Siva’s retinue, every animal they rode started back and fled in panic. The 
adults recovered themselves and remained where they were, while every child that came 
ran for its life. On their reaching home when their parents questioned them, they spoke 
as follows, their limbs still shaking with fear, “What shall we say? The sight was such 
as could not be described. We wonder whether it was a bridegroom’s procession or the 
army of Death. The bridegroom is a maniac, riding on a bull; serpents, skulls and ashes 
are his ornaments.” (1 — 4) 


“His body is smeared with ashes and adorned with serpents and skulls. He is 
naked, has matted hair on his head and is dreadful to look at. He is accompanied by 
ghosts and evil spirits, goblins and fairies and demons with a frightful countenance. He 
who survives on seeing the marriage procession is a man of great luck indeed and he 
alone will witness the wedding of Uma.” These were the words uttered by the children 
from house to house. 

121

The parents smiled; for they knew that the children were talking of Siva’s retinue. 
They reassured the children in many ways and said, “Be not afraid, there is no cause 
for fear.” (95) 

Chapter 26
The party which had gone ahead to receive the marriage procession returned 
with the procession and assigned beautiful lodgings to all the guests. Maina (Parvati’s 
mother) kindled auspicious lights for waving round the bridegroom and the women 
accompanying her sang melodious songs of rejoicing. A salver of gold adorned 
Mena’s fair hands and she proceeded to welcome Lord Hara with great delight. The 
women were seized with excessive fear when they saw Rudra (Siva) in frightful 
accoutrements. They fled in great panic and entered the house; while the great Lord 
Siva repaired to the lodgings of the bridegroom’s party. Maina was sore distressed 
at heart and sent for Parvati. With great affection she seated her in her lap; and tears 
rushed to her eyes; which resembled a pair of blue lotuses. “How the Creator, who 
has made you so beautiful, has became so stupid to create such a raving madman 
for your bridegroom!” (1 — 4) 

122


“How strange that the Creator, who has made you so lovely, should have given you 
a crazy fellow for a bridegroom ! A fruit which should have adorned the wish-yielding tree 
is helplessly appearing on a thorny Babula. Taking you in my arms I would sooner fall 
from a mountain-top, cast myself into the flames or drown myself into the sea. Let my 
home be ruined and let me earn a bad reputation throughout the world; but in no case 
would I marry you with this maniac so long as there is life in me.” 

All the ladies assembled there were distressed when they saw the consort of 
Himacala sad. Recalling the affection of her daughter she wailed, wept and exclaimed as 
below: — (96) 

“What harm have I done to Narada that he should have ruined my home and 
tendered such advice to Uma as made her undergo penance for securing a crazy 
husband? In good sooth the sage is passionless and without affection; he has no wealth, 
no dwelling and no wife and is indifferent to all. That is why he destroys others’ homes. 
He has neither shame nor fear. What does a barren woman know of the pains of 
childbirth?” Seeing Her mother distressed, Bhavanl addressed the following soft yet 
prudent words to her. “Whatever is ordained by Providence cannot be altered. Realizing 
this be not worried, mother. If I am destined to have a crazy husband, why should 
anyone be blamed for it? Can you alter the decree of Providence? Therefore, take no 
reproach on you unnecessarily.” (1 — 4) 

123


“Take no reproach on you; cease lamenting; this is no occasion for it. The amount 
of joy and sorrow that has fallen to my lot I must reap wherever I go.” Hearing the soft 
and polite words of Lima all the ladies became sad. They blamed the Creator in many 
ways and tears flowed from their eyes. 

On hearing the news that very moment Himacala came to his house alongwith 
Narada and the seven seers. (97) 

Then Narada reassured them all, narrating to them the past history of Uma. He 
said, “Maina, hear my true words: your daughter is none else than Bhavani (the eternal 
Consort of Siva), Mother of the universe. She is the unborn and imperishable divine 


124

energy, who has no beginning; She is Sambhu’s inseparable half. She creates, maintains 
and then dissolves the universe and assumes the semblance of a human form of Her own 
will. First she was born in the house of Daksa. Sati was Her name and charming was 
Her form. Even in that incarnation Sati was married with Sankara. The story is well-known 
throughout the world. One day, while She was returning home with Siva, She beheld Sri 
Rama, who is a sun as it were to the lotus-like race of Raghu. Bewildered by His sight, 
She did not listen to Siva’s advice and was beguiled into assuming the disguise of Sita. 

“Sankara repudiated Her because She had offended Him by assuming the 
disguise of Sita. Separated from Hara, She then visited the sacrifice undertaken by Her 
father and burnt Herself in the fire of Yoga (meditation) there. Now, reborn in your house, 
She has undergone terrible penance for the sake of Her lord. Knowing this, give up all 
doubt; Girija (your daughter) is ever beloved of Sankara.” 

When they heard Narada’s explanation, the sadness of all was dispersed. In a trice 
the news spread from house to house throughout the city. (98) 

125
Chapter 27
Then Maina and her consort Himavan rejoiced and bowed at Parvati’s feet again 
and again. All the citizens, including men, women and children, youngmen as well as 
elderly people, were immensely delighted. Festive songs began to be sung in the city; 
vases of gold of every pattern were displayed by all. Dishes of various kinds were 
prepared in accordance with the processes given in gastrological works. Is it ever possible 
to describe the varieties of dishes prepared in the house where lived Mother Bhavanl? 
Himacala respectfully summoned all the members of the bridegroom’s party, including 
Visnu, Brahma and other gods of all classes. The dinner guests sat in many rows; and 
expert cooks began to serve. Finding the gods dining, batches of women began to banter 
and rail at them in pleasant strains. (1 — 4) 

Charming women railed in sweet strains and poured innuendoes. The gods felt 
much amused to hear them and dined for an unusually long time. The joy that swelled 
at the dinner cannot be described even with millions of tongues. Having been served with 
water for rinsing their mouths at the end of the dinner, they were given betel-leaves; and 
then they returned to their respective lodgings. 

The seven sages called once more and read out to Himavan the note recording 
the time fixed for the wedding; and perceiving that the hour had arrived, the latter sent 
for the gods. (99) 

126

Himavan politely sent for all the gods and assigned an appropriate seat to each 
of them. An altar was prepared in accordance with the Vedic ritual and women chanted 
charming festal strains. A divinely beautiful throne with the images of a pair of lions for 
its arms was placed on the altar; being a handiwork of the Creator himself, it beggared 
description. Bowing His head to the Brahmanas and calling to His mind His own Master, 
the Lord of Raghus, Siva took His seat on the throne. The great sages then sent for 
Uma, who was brought in by Her girl companions richly adorned. All the gods were 
enraptured at Her beauty. What poet in the world could describe such loveliness? 
Recognizing in Her the Mother of the universe and Spouse of Siva, the divinities 
mentally bowed to Her. The perfection of beauty that Bhavanl was, could not be 
adequately praised even with millions of tongues. (1 — 4) 

The superb beauty of the Mother of the universe could not be described even with 
millions of tongues. When even the Vedas, Sesa (the serpent-god) and Sarada (the 
goddess of learning) shrink abashed, of what account is the dull-witted Tulasldasa? 
Mother Bhavani, the mine of beauty, walked to the middle of the pavilion, where Siva was. 
Out of shyness She could not gaze on Her lord’s lotus feet, although Her heart was fixed 
thereon like a bee. 

127

At the direction of the sages Sambhu and Bhavani paid divine honours to Lord 
Ganapati. Let no one be puzzled to hear this; for one should bear in mind that gods have 
existed from time without beginning.* (100) 

The great sages had the nuptial ceremony performed in all its details as laid down 
in the Vedas. Taking sacred Kusa grass in his hand and holding the bride by Her hand, 
the mountain-king Himalaya made Her over to Bhava (Siva) knowing Her to be His 
eternal consort. When the great Lord Siva took the hand of the bride, all the great gods 
were glad at heart. The principal sages chanted the Vedic formulas, while the gods 
exclaimed, “Hail, Hail, all Hail to Sankara !” Musical instruments of various kinds were 
sounded and flowers of different varieties were rained down from the heavens. The 
wedding of Hara and Girija was thus concluded. A spirit of rejoicing pervaded the whole 
universe. Men-servants and maid-servants, horses and chariots, elephants and cows, 
raiment, jewels and various other articles and even so cart-loads of foodgrains and gold 
utensils were given as dowry, which was more than one could describe. (1 — 4) 



* Lord Ganapati is reputed to be an offspring of Siva and ParvatT. It may, therefore, be asked how He 
came to be worshipped by the divine pair even at the time of their wedding. The poet meets this question by 
stating that Ganesa and the other gods are eternal and unbegotten and that they only appear to be born. 


128

Himacala gave presents of various kinds as dowry; then, joining his palms, he said, 
“I have nothing to give you, Sankara; You have all Yours desires sated!” He could say 
no more and remained clasping the latter’s feet. The ocean of mercy that Siva is 
reassured His father-in-law in every possible way. Then Mena, with her heart overflowing 
with love, clasped His lotus-feet and said: — 


“Lord, Uma is dear to me as life; take her as a maid-servant of Your house and 
forgive all her faults. Be pleased to grant this boon to me.” (101) 


Sambhu comforted His mother-in-law in ways more than one; and she returned 
home bowing her head at his feet. The mother then sent for Uma, and taking Her into 
her lap gave Her the following excellent advice. “Ever adore the feet of Sankara this 
sums up the duty of a wife. Her husband is her deity; there is no other god for her.” As 
she spoke these words, her eyes filled with tears and she pressed the girl to her bosom. 
“Why has god created woman in this world? One who is subardinate on others can never 
dream of happiness.” The mother was overwhelmed with emotion; but knowing as she 
did that it was not an opportune moment for betraying one’s weakness, she recovered 
herself. Maina met Parvati again and again and fell down clasping the girl’s feet; her 



129 


supreme love was beyond all words. Bidding adieu to all the ladies Bhavani ran and clung 
to her mother’s breast once more. (1 — 4) 

Taking leave of Her mother once more, Bhavani departed; everyone uttered 
appropriate blessings to Her. She often turned back to have a look at Her mother; Her 
girl companions then took Her to Siva. Having gratified all beggars. Sankara proceeded 
to His home (Mount Kaiiasa) with Lima. All the divinities delightfully rained down flowers 
and kettledrums produced a charming sound in the heavens. 

Himavan then accompanied Siva in order to see Him off with great affection. Siva, 
however, sent him back, consoling him in various ways. (102) 

130


The mountain-king returned home at once and summoned all other mountains and 
lakes. Himavan greeted them with due attention, gifts, polite words and great honour and 
allowed them all to depart. No sooner had Sambhu reached Mount Kailasa than all the 
gods returned to their respective realms. Sambhu and Bhavani are the parents of the 
universe; hence I refrain from portraying their amorous sports. Indulging in luxuries and 
enjoyments of various kinds the divine pair lived on Mount Kailasa alongwith Their 
attendants. Hara and Girija enjoyed some new delight everyday. In this way a considerable 
time elapsed. Thereafter was born to them a boy with six heads, who (later on) killed the 
demon Taraka in battle. The story of Sanmukha (the six-headed deity) is well-known in 
the Vedas, Tantras and Puranas, and the entire world knows it. (1 — 4) 

The tale of the birth, exploits, glory and surpassing strength of Sanmukha is 
known to the whole world. That is why I have briefly touched the narrative of Siva’s son. 
Men and women who narrate or sing this story of the wedding of Uma and Sambhu shall 
ever rejoice in their auspicious undertaking as well as during festive occassions such as 
wedding etc. 

The exploits of Girija’s lord are illimitable like the ocean; even the Vedas cannot 
reach their end. How, then, can Tulasidasa, a most dull-witted clown, succeed in 
describing them? (103) 

131

Bharadvaja was much delighted to hear the sweet and charming story of Sambhu’s 
deeds. His passion for hearing the story grew to be inordinate; tears rushed to his eyes 
and the hair on his body bristled with joy. Overpowered with emotion he could not utter 
a word. The enlightened sage Yajnavalkya was delighted to see his condition. “Blessed 
indeed is your birth. O great sage,” he said, “to you the Lord of GaurT is dear as life. 
Those who love not Siva’s lotus feet cannot even dream of pleasing Rama. A guileless 
love for Siva’s feet is the surest sign of a devotee of Rama. Who is so faithful to the Lord 
of Raghus as Siva, who renounced a sinless wife like Sati, and demonstrated ideal 
devotion to Rama by His pledge of unswerving fidelity? Brother, whom does Rama hold 
so dear as Siva? (1 — 4) 
“Having begun by recounting the deeds of Siva I have come to know your secret. 
You are indeed a faithful servant of Rama, free from all impurities.” (104) 

132

I have come to know your virtues and disposition. Listen, therefore, while I narrate 
the story of the Lord of Raghus. O sage, I cannot say how glad I am at this meeting with 
you today. O lord of sages, the exploits of Sri Rama are much beyond measure; even 
a thousand million Sesas (serpent-kings) cannot recount them. Nevertheless, fixing my 
thoughts on the Lord who wields a bow in His hand and is the lord of speech, I repeat 
the tale as I have heard it. Sarada (the goddess of speech) is like a puppet; while Sri 
Rama, the inner controller of all, is the master of the puppet show, who holds the strings 
in his hands. When He blesses a poet knowing him to be a devotee, He causes the 
goddess to dance in the courtyard of his heart. To Him, the benevolent Lord of Raghus, 
I bow and commence the recital of His fair virtues. Of all mountains the most charming 
and the best is Kailasa, where Siva and Lima eternally dwell. (1 — 4) 

Hosts of Siddhas (adepts) ascetics and Yogis (mystics), as well as gods, Kinnaras 
and sages, all lucky souls, reside there and 
adore Siva, the root of all joy. (1 05) 

Those who have their faces turned away from Hari and Hara and have no love for 
righteousness cannot even dream of going there. On the summit of that mountain exists a 
huge banyan tree, which is ever young and is charming during all seasons. Fanned by 
cool, soft and fragrant breezes, its shade is very refreshing. It is the favourite resort of Siva, 
extolled by the Vedas. Once upon a time the Lord betook Himself beneath the tree and was 
much gladdened at heart to see it. Spreading His tigerskin on the ground with His own 
hands, the all-merciful Siva sat down casually. His body fair in hue as the jasmine, the 




BALA-KANDA 


133 
moon and the conch-shell; long arms of inordinate length; a hermit’s covering, consisting of 
the bark of trees, wrapped round His loins; His feet resembling a pair of full-blown red 
lotuses and their toe-nails shedding a lustre which dispelled the darkness of the devotee’s 
heart; serpents and the ashes serving as ornaments of the Slayer of T ripura and His countenance 
eclipsing the splendour even of the autumnal full moon. (1 — 4) 

With His twisted coils of hair for a crown and the celestial stream (the Gariga) 
adorning His head, eyes as big as a pair of lotuses, throat dark with poison and with the 
crescent shining on His brow, the Lord looked like a veritable mine of beauty. (106) 

Seated there, the Destroyer of Cupid looked like an incarnation of the sentiment 
of Quietism. Finding it a good opportunity, Mother Bhavani called on Sambhu. In 
recognition of Her wifely love Lord Hara showed Her great courtesy and assigned Her 
a seat on His left side. Parvati gladly sat down beside Siva and recalled the history of 
Her past life. Presuming that Her lord cherished in His heart greater love for Her than 
before, Uma smilingly spoke the following sweet words to Him: the Daughter of Himalaya 
sought to elicit from Her lord the story which is profitable to the whole world. “O Lord of 
the universe, O my Master, O slayer of the demon Tripura! Your glory is known to all 
the three spheres. Animate as well as inanimate beings, Nagas, men and gods, all do 
homage to Your lotus-feet. (1 — 4) 

134

“My Lord, You are all-powerful, all-wise and all-blissful; You are a repository of all 
arts and virtues and a storehouse of Yoga (askesis), wisdom and dispassion. Your Name 
is a wish-yielding tree as it were to the suppliant. (107) 

“O blissful Lord, if You are pleased with me and know me to be Your faithful 
servant, then, my Master, disperse my ignorance by repeating to me the various stories 
of the Lord of Raghus. Why should he who has his abode beneath a wish-yielding tree 
undergo the suffering born of want? Bearing this in mind, O Lord with the crescent on 
the forehead, dispel the great confusion of my mind. O Lord, the sages who discourse 
on the supreme Reality speak of Rama as the Brahma who has no beginning; Sesa and 
Sarada, as well as the Vedas and the Puranas, all sing praises of the Lord of Raghus. 
You too, O Subduer of Love, reverently repeat the word ‘Rama’ night and day. Is this 
Rama the same as the son of the King of Ayodhya or some other unborn, unqualified and 
imperceptible Being?” (1 — 4) 

“If a king’s son, how could he be Brahma (the Infinite)? And if he were Brahma, 
how could his mind get unhinged by the loss of his wife? When I see his acts on the one 
hand, and hear of his glory on the other, my mind gets utterly confused.” (108) 




BALA-KANDA 


135 
“If, my lord, there is any other desireless, all-pervading and all-powerful Brahma, 
instruct me about the same. Be not angry at my folly, but take steps to wipe out my ignorance. 
In the wood (in my previous birth) I witnessed Sri Rama’s glory, although I was too awe- 
stricken to tell You. Yet, my mind was so impure that I did not understand, and I reaped a 
good return for my folly. Some doubt still lingers in my mind. Be gracious to me, I implore 
You with joined palms. Lord, You instructed me then in ways more than one; yet I did not 
understand. Do not allow this thought to anger You. I have no such delusion now; I find 
developed in me a taste for hearing the story of Rama. Recount the sacred virtues of Sri 
Rama, O Lord of immortals, having the serpent-king (Sesa) for an ornament.” (1 — 4) 


“Placing my head on the ground, I adore Your feet and entreat You with joined 
palms to recount the unsullied glory of the Chief of Raghus, giving in substance the 
conclusion of the revealed texts (the Vedas) on the subject. (109) 

136

Chapter 28
“Though as a woman I am not qualified to hear it, I am Your servant in thought, 
word and deed. Saints do not withhold even an esoteric truth wherever they find a person 
smitten with agony, and therefore qualified to receive it. I ask You with a heart sore 
distressed; be gracious enough to narrate the story of the Lord of Raghus. First tell me 
after a mature thought what makes the unqualified Brahma assume a qualified form. 
Then, my lord, relate the story of Sri Rama’s descent, and tell me next the charming 
exploits of His childhood. Then let me know how He wedded Janaka’s daughter, Sita, 
and the fault for which He had to renounce His father’s kingdom later on. Then describe 
the innumerable deeds performed by Him while He lived in the forest; and further tell me, 
my lord, how He killed Ravana. Then relate, O blissful Sankara, all the numerous sports 
that were enacted by Him after his coronation. (1 — 4) 

“Thereafter relate, O gracious Lord, the miracle wrought by Rama, viz., how that 
Jewel of Raghu’s line proceeded to His divine Abode alongwith all His subjects.” (110) 

137



“Then expound, my lord, the truth in the realization of which enlightened sages 
remain absorbed. And thereafter discuss in detail the conceptions of Devotion, Jnana or 
Knowledge of the formless Absolute, Vijnana or the Knowledge of qualified Divinity with 
and without form, and Dispassion. Over and above this, O Lord of purest understanding, 
reveal to me the many other mysteries connected with Rama. And if there be anything 
which I have omitted to ask, do not keep it back, my gracious lord. You are the preceptor 
of all the three spheres, so declare the Vedas; what can other poor creatures know?” 
Siva was glad at heart to hear these questions of Uma, naturally pleasing and guileless 
as they were. All the exploits of Rama flashed on His mind; the hair on His body bristled 
with rapture and His eyes filled with tears. The figure of Sri Rama was reflected on the 
mirror of His heart. This brought immense joy to Siva, who is an embodiment of supreme 
bliss Himself. (1 — 4) 

For an hour or so Siva was lost in the ecstasy of meditation. He then recovered 
Himself and thereafter began joyfully to tell the story of Rama. (Ill) 

“Due to lack of knowledge about Sri Rama even the unreal passes for real, just 
as ignorance about a rope leads us to mistake it for a snake. Even so the moment we 
know Him the world of matter vanishes, just as the delusion of a dream disappears as 
soon as we wake up. Him do I reverence in the form of a Child, the repetition of whose 
Name brings all kinds of success within our easy reach. May that Home of bliss and 
Bane of woe take compassion on me — He who sports in the courtyard of king 
Dasaratha.” After thus paying homage to Rama, the Slayer of the demon Tripura joyfully 

138


spoke in mellifluous accents as follows: “You are indeed blessed and worthy of applause, 
O daughter of the mountain-king; there is no such benefactor as you. You have asked 
Me to repeat the history of the Lord of Raghus, which is potent enough to sanctify all the 
spheres even as the Gariga purifies the whole world. You are full of love for the feet of 
the Hero of Raghu’s race; You have put questions to Me only with an eye to the good 
of the world.” (1 — 4) 
“By the blessing of Rama, O Parvati, not even in dream can grief, infatuation, 
doubt or error enter your mind, so far as I can judge.” (112) 

“Yet you have expressed the same old doubts again, so that all those who repeat 
or hear this account may be benefited thereby. The ears of those who have never heard 
the stories of Sri Hari are no better than snake-holes. The eyes of those who have not 
blessed them with the sight of saints are as good as the sham eyes in a peacock’s tail. 
The heads that bow not at the soles of Sri Hari or of one’s preceptor are just like bitter 
pumpkins. Those who have cherished not in their heart the spirit of devotion to Sri Hari 
are as good as dead, though living. The tongue that does not sing the praises of Rama 
is just like the tongue of a frog. The heart which does not rejoice to hear the tales of Sri 
Hari is hard as adamant and cruel indeed. Hear, O Girija, the exploits of Sri Rama, which 
prove beneficial to the gods and mystify the demons.” (1 — 4) 

139


“Like the cow of plenty, the story of Rama bestows all blessings on those who 
devote themselves to it; and the assemblages of saints are the various abodes of gods. 
Knowing this, who would not listen to it?” (113) 

“The story of Rama is the lovely clap of hand-palms which scares away the 
birds of doubt. Even so the story of Rama is an axe to the tree of Kaliyuga (the 
impurities of the Kali age); listen to it with reverence, O daughter of the mountain-king. 
The charming names of Sri Rama, as well as His virtues, stories, births and deeds 
have all been declared by the Vedas to be beyond number. As there is no end to the 
divine Rama, even so His stories, glory and virtues are also endless. Yet, seeing your 
great love, I will tell them even as I have heard of them to the best of my intellectual 
capacity. Uma, your inquiries are naturally winning and delightful and such as are 
approved of by the saints; as for myself I am particularly pleased to hear them. But 
there was one thing, Bhavani, which I did not like, although you uttered it under a spell 
of delusion: you suggested that the Rama whom the Vedas extol and on whom the 
sages contemplate is someone else!” (1 — 4) 


“Such words are spoken and heard by those vile men alone who are possessed 
by the devil of infatuation, are impious and averse to the feet of Sri Hari and know no 
difference between truth and falsehood.” (114) 




140 


“Foolish, ignorant and blind wretches, the mirror of whose heart is clouded by the 
film of sensuality, lecherous, deceitful and grossly perverse, who have never seen an 
assemblage of holy men even in a dream and who have no sense of gain and loss, they 
alone make statements which are repugnant to the Vedas. The mirror of their heart is 
soiled and they have no eyes to see; how-then, can those wretched souls behold the 
beauty of Sri Rama? For those who have no knowledge either of the unqualified Brahma 
or of qualified Divinity, who indulge in fanciful utterances of various kinds and who spin 
round in this world under the influence of Sri Hari’s deluding potency, no assertion is too 
absurd to make. Those who are delirious or mad, those who are possessed and those 
who are inebriated, do not talk sense. None should give ear to the ravings of those who 
have drunk the wine of infatuation.” (1 — 4) 

“Thus assured in your heart, discard all doubt and adore Sri Rama’s feet. O 
daughter of the mountain-king, hear my words, which are sun-beams as it were for the 
darkness of error.” (115) 

141

Chapter 29
There is no difference between qualified Divinity and the unqualified Brahma: so 
declare the sages and men of wisdom, the Vedas and the Puranas. That which is 
attributeless and formless, imperceptible and unborn, becomes qualified under the 
influence of the devotee’s love. How can the Absolute become qualified? In the same 
way as water and the hail-stone are non-different in substance. Infatuation is out of the 
question for Him whose very Name is like the sun to the darkness of error. Sri Rama, 
who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss combined, is like the sun; the night of ignorance 
cannot subsist in Him even to the smallest degree. He is the Lord whose very being is 
light; there is no dawn of understanding in His case (for the dawn presupposes night and 
night there is none in the sunlight of Sri Rama). Joy and grief, knowledge and ignorance, 
egoism and pride — these are the characteristics of a Jiva (finite being). Sri Rama is the 
all-pervading Brahma; He is supreme bliss personified, the highest Lord and the most 
ancient Being. The whole world knows it. (1 — 4) 


“He who is universally known as the Spirit, the fount of light, manifest in all forms 
and is the lord of life as well as of matter, that Jewel of Raghu’s line is my Master.”
So saying Siva bowed His head to Him. 

142

“Fools do not perceive their own error; on the other hand, those stupid creatures 
attribute infatuation to the Lord, just as on seeing the sky covered with clouds, men of 
unsound judgment declare that the sun has been screened by the clouds. To him who 
sees with a finger stuck into his eyes the moon appears as doubled. Uma, infatuation 
is attributed to Rama in the same way as darkness, smoke or dust appears in the sky. 
The objects of the senses, the senses and their presiding deities as well as the Jiva 
(embodied soul) — all these derive their illumination one from the other. (That is to say, 
the objects are illumined by the senses, the senses are illumined by their presiding 
deities and the deities presiding over the senses are illumined by the conscious Self). 
The supreme illuminator of them all is the eternal Rama, king of Ayodhya. The world of 
matter is the object of illumination, while Rama is its illuminator. He is the lord of Maya 
and the abode of wisdom and virtues. It is due to His reality that even unconscious 
Matter appears as real through ignorance.” (1 — 4) 


“Just as a shell is mistaken for silver and a mirage for water even though the 
appearance is false at all times (in the past, present and future), nobody can dispel this 
delusion.” (117) 

143

“In a like manner is this world of matter superimposed on Hari. Though unreal, 
it gives us pain nonetheless, just as if a man’s head is cut off in a dream, he is not 
rid of pain till he wakes. Girija, He whose grace wipes out such delusion is none else 
than the benevolent Lord of Raghus. Nobody has been able to discover His beginning 
or end. Basing their conclusions on speculation the Vedas have described Him in the 
following words. He walks without feet, hears without ears and performs actions of 
various kinds even without hands. He enjoys all tastes without a mouth (palate) and 
is a most clever speaker even though devoid of speech. He touches without a body 
(the tactile sense), sees without eyes and catches all odours even without a nose (the 
olfactory sense). His ways are thus supernatural in every respect and His glory is 
beyond description.” (1 — 4) 

“He who is thus extolled by the Vedas and men of wisdom and whom the sages 
love to contemplate is no other than the divine Rama, son of Dasaratha, lord of Ayodhya, 
the friend of His devotees.” (118) 

“When I behold any creature dying in the holy KasT (the modern Varanasi), it is by 
the power of His Name that I rid it of all sorrow (liberate it). He is my Lord, the Chief of 




144 


Raghus, the sovereign of all creation, animate as well as inanimate, the witness of all 
hearts. If men repeat His Name even in a helpless state, sins committed by them in a 
series of previous existences are burnt away; while those who devoutly remember Him 
are able to cross the ocean of mundane existence as if it were a mere hollow made by 
the hoof of a cow. Rama is no other than that supreme Spirit. Bhavani; your assertion 
that He is subject to delusion is wholly unwarranted. The moment a man harbours such 
a doubt in his mind, his wisdom, dispassion and all other virtues bid adieu to him.” When 
Parvati heard Siva’s illuminating words, the whole structure of her sophistry collapsed. 
Attachment and devotion to the feet of the Lord of Raghus sprang in her heart and her 
shocking incredulity disappeared. (1 — 4) 


Clasping the lotus-feet of her lord again and again, and joining her lotus-like palms, 
Parvati spoke the following fine words, steeping them as it were in the nectar of love: — 

“Now that I have listened to Your words, which were refreshing as moonbeams, 
my ignorance, like the feverish heat of the autumnal sunshine, has faded away. You 
have removed all my doubt, O gracious Lord, and the reality of Rama has been revealed 
to me. By Your grace, my lord, my gloom has been lifted and I feel happy now by the 
blessing of my lord’s feet. Now, regarding me as Your slave, even though I am a woman, 
ignorant and stupid by nature, answer my former question, if You are pleased with me, 
my lord. Rama, I now understand, is no other than the indestructible Brahma (God), who 
is consciousness itself and who, though bereft of all, yet dwells in the heart of all. Why 




BALA-KANDA 


145 
did He take the form of a human being? Explain this to me, O Sankara.” Hearing Lima’s 
most polite words and seeing Her unadulterated love for the story of Sri Rama — (1 — 4) 


— The all-merciful and all-wise Sankara, the Destroyer of Cupid, was glad at heart 
and, extolling Uma in so many ways, said : — (120A) 


“Hear the blessed story of the holy Ramacaritamanasa, which was narrated at 
length by the sage Bhusundi and heard by the king of birds, Garuda, I shall tell you later 
on how that great dialogue took place. First listen to the most charming and sanctifying 
story of His descent. The virtues, names, stories and forms of Sri Hari are all unlimited, 
innumerable and immeasurable. Yet I proceed to tell them according to the best of my 
intellectual capacity; listen, Uma, with reverence.” (120 B — D) 

146

“Hark, O Girija: the Vedas and the Tantras have sung numerous charming and 
sinless exploits of Sri Hari. The cause of Sri Hari’s descent cannot be precisely stated. 
Listen, O sensible lady: Sri Rama is beyond the grasp of intellect, mind or speech: such 
is my conviction. Yet, O charming lady, I tell you the reason as I understand it and even 
as the saints and sages, the Vedas and the Puranas have stated according to their 
intellectual level. Whenever virtue declines and vile and haughty demons multiply and 
work uniquity that cannot be told, and whenever Brahmanas, cows, gods and earth itself 
are in trouble, the gracious Lord assumes various (transcendent) forms and relieves the 
distress of the virtuous.” (1 — 4) 


“Killing the demons He reinstates the gods, preserves the bounds of propriety 
fixed by the Vedas, which represent His own breath, and diffuses His immaculate glory 
throughout the world. This is the motive of Sri Rama’s descent.” (121) 

147

“Singing this glory the devotees cross the ocean of mundane existence; it is for 
the sake of His devotees that the compassionate Lord bodies Himself forth. The motives 
of Sri Rama’s birth are many, each more wonderful than the other. I will refer to one 
or two such births at some length; please listen attentively, O wise Bhavani. Sri Hari 
has two favourite gate-keepers Jaya and Vijaya, who are known to everybody. Due to 
the curse of certain Brahmanas (Sanaka and his three brothers) both these brothers 
were born in the accursed species of demons. One of them was known as Hiranyakasipu 
and the other as Hiranyaksa. They became known throughout the universe as the 
tamers of the pride of Indra (the chief of gods). Both of them were celebrated heroes 
who came out victorious in battle. The Lord assumed the form of a Boar in order to 
kill one of the two brothers (viz., Hiranyaksa); while bodying Himself forth as a Man- 
Lion, He killed the other (Hiranyakasipu) and spread the fair renown of His devotee, 
Prahlada (Hiranyakasipu’s son).” (1 — 4) 


“It is these two brothers that were born again as the powerful and most valiant 
Raksasas. Ravana and Kumbhakarna, who were great warriors and, as all the world 
knows, conquered even gods.” (122) 


“Even though slain by the Lord, the two brothers (Hiranyaksa and Hiranyakasipu) 
did not attain liberation; for the Brahmanas had doomed them to three births. It was on 
their account that the Lover of the devotees bodied Himself forth on one occasion. In that 
birth Kasyapa and Aditi were His parents, who were known by the names of Dasaratha 
and Kausalya respectively. This was how in one Kalpa (round of creation) the Lord 
descended from heaven and performed purifying deeds on earth. In another Kalpa all the 
gods were worsted in their conflict with the demon Jalandhara. Seeing their distress 

148

“By a stratagem the Lord broke her vow of chastity and accomplished the purpose 
of the gods. When the lady discovered the trick, she cursed Him in her wrath.” (123) 

“The sportive and gracious Lord accepted her curse. It was this Jalandhara who 
was reborn as Ravana in this latter Kalpa. Killing him in battle Sri Rama conferred on him 
the supreme state (final beatitude). This was the reason why Sri Rama assumed a 
human form in one particular birth. Hark, O Bharadvaja; the story of each birth of the Lord 
has been sung by poets in diverse ways. On one occasion Narada cursed the Lord; this 
served as an excuse of His birth in one particular Kalpa.” Girija was taken aback to hear 
these words and said, “Narada is a votary of God Visnu and enlightened soul too. 
Wherefore did the sage pronounce a curse? What offence had Laksmi’s lord committed 
against him? Tell me the whole story, O Slayer of the demon Tripura. It is very strange 
that the sage should have fallen a prey to delusion.” (1 — 4) 

149

The great Lord Siva then replied with a smile, “There is no one enlightened or 
deluded. Man instantly becomes what the Lord of Raghus wills him to be at a particular 
moment.” (124 A) 
Said Yajnavalkya, “I am going to recount the virtues of Rama, O Bharadvaja; listen 
with a devout mind.” Renouncing pride and intoxication, O Tulasidasa, adore the Lord of 
Raghus, who puts an end to metempsychosis. (124 B) 


“In the Himalaya mountains there was a most sacred cave; the beautiful heavenly 
stream (Gariga) flowed near by. The sight of this most holy and charming hermitage highly 
attracted the mind of the celestial sage Narada. Seeing the mountain, the river and the 
forest glades, his heart developed love for the feet of LaksmT’s lord. The thought of Sri Hari 
broke the spell of the curse* (pronounced by Daksa, which did not allow him to stay at one 
place); and his mind, which was naturally sinless, fell into a trance. Seeing the sage’s 
condition, Indra (the chief of gods) became apprehensive. Summoning the god of love, he 
received him with great honour and said, “For my sake go with your associates!” The god 
of love (who has a fish emblazoned on his standard) set out gladdened at heart. Indra 
apprehended that the celestial sage sought to occupy his abode. Those who are lustful and 
grasping are afraid of everyone like the evil-minded crow. (1 — 4) 

150

Just as a foolish dog, on seeing a king of beasts, should run away with a dry bone, 
fearing in his crass ignorance lest the lion should rob him of it, Indra too in his 
shamelessness thought as above. (125) 


When the god of love reached that hermitage, he created a semblance of the 
vernal season by his illusory power. Many-coloured blossoms appeared on the trees of 
different kinds; cuckoos sang and bees hummed. Delightful breezes, cool, soft and 
fragrant, blew, fanning the flame of passion. Rambha and other heavenly damsels, who 
looked ever young and were all past masters in amorous sports, sang in undulating 
tones of various kinds and sported in many ways, ball in hand. The god of love was 
delighted to see his associates there and employed a variety of devices. But his amorous 
devices had no effect on the sage. Guilty Cupid was now apprehensive of his own 
destruction. Can anyone dare to trespass the bounds of him who has the Lord of Laksmi 
as his great protector. (1 — 4) 

In dire dismay the god of love with his accomplices acknowledged his defeat and 
clasped the sage’s feet, addressing him in accents of deep humility. (126) 

151

There was no anger in Narada’s mind; he reassured the god of love by 
addressing him in friendly terms. Then, bowing his head at the sage’s feet and 
obtaining his leave, Love retired with his accomplices. Reaching the court of Indra (the 
chief of gods) he related his own doings, on the one hand, and the sage’s clemency, 
on the other. Hearing the tale all were astonished; they extolled the sage and bowed 
their head to Hari. Then Narada called on Siva; he was proud of his victory over Love 
and told Him all Love’s doings. Knowing him to be His most beloved friend, the great 
Lord Siva admonished him as follows: — “O sage, I pray you again and again: never 
repeat this story to Hari as you have repeated it to me. Even if the topic ever comes 
up before Him, please hush it up.” (1 — 4) 


Wholesome was the advice given by Sambhu; but it did not please 
Narada. Bharadvaja, now hear what interesting thing happened. The will of Hari is 
predominant. (127) 


152


The will of Sri Rama alone prevails; there is no one who can alter it. Sambhu’s 
advice fell flat on the sage. Then he went to the abode of Brahma (the Creator). Singing 
the glories of Sri Hari, to the accompaniment of the excellent lute he had in his hand, the 
lord of sages, Narada, who was skilled in music, once repaired to the ocean of milk. 
Where dwells the abode of Laksmi, Bhagavan Narayana, who is Vedanta (the crown of 
all Vedas) personified. The abode of Rama (Laksmi) rose to meet him in great joy and 
shared His seat with the sage. The Lord of the entire creation, animate as well as 
inanimate, said with a smile, “It is after a long time that you have showed Me this favour, 
reverend sir.” Narada told Him all the doings of Love, even though Siva had already 
forbidden him to do so. Most formidable is the Maya (deluding potency) of the Lord of 
Raghus. No one was ever born in this world, who is beyond its charm. (1 — 4) 


With an impassive look, yet in coaxing accents, said the Lord, “By your very 
thought self-delusion, lust, arrogance and pride disappear.” (128) 

153

Chapter 30
“Hark, O sage! the mind of him alone is susceptible to delusion, whose heart is 
devoid of wisdom and dispassion. You are steadfast in your vow of celibacy and resolute 
of mind; you can never be smitten with pangs of Love.” Narada replied with a feeling 
of pride, “Lord it is all due to Your grace.” The compassionate Lord pondered and saw 
that a huge tree of pride had sprouted in his heart. “I shall soon tear it up by roots; for 
it is My vow to serve the best interest of My servants. I must contrive some plan which 
may do good to the sage and serve as a diversion for Me.” Then, bowing his head at 
the feet of Sri Hari, Narada departed. The pride in his heart had swelled. The Lord of 
Laksmi (the goddess of prosperity) then set His Maya into operation. Now hear of her 
relentless doings. (1 — 4) 


The Lord’s Maya (deluding potency) created on the way a city with an area of eight 
hundred square miles. The manifold architectural beauties of that city excelled even 
those of Visnu’s own capital (Vaikuntha). (129) 


It was inhabited by graceful men and women, whom you would take to be so many 
incarnations of the god of love and his wife Rati. A king, Sllanidhi by name, ruled over 
that city; he owned numberless horses, elephants and troops. He possessed the 
grandeur and luxury of a hundred Indras, and was a repository of grace, splendour, might 
and wisdom. He had a daughter, Visvamohini by name, whose beauty enraptured even 
Laksmi. She was no other than Sri Hari’s own Maya (enrapturing potency), the 
fountainhead of all virtues; who can describe her charm? The princess was going to 
marry by self-choice; hence kings beyond number arrived there as suitors. The sportive 




154 


sage (Narada) entered the city and inquired everything from the people. Hearing all that 
had been going on there, he wended his way to the king’s palace. The king paid him 
homage and gave him a seat. (1 — 4) 

The king brought and showed the princess to Narada and said, “Tell me after 
mature thought all that is good or bad about her.” (130) 


Seeing her beauty the sage forgot all about his dispassion and remained gazing 
on her for a long time. When he read the auspicious marks on her body, he was lost 
in reverie. He was gladdened at heart, but he would not openly mention the happy 
characteristics. “He who weds this girl,” he said to himself, “Shall become immortal; 
and no one shall be able to conquer him in battle. He whom Silanidhi’s daughter selects 
for her lord shall be adored by the entire creation, both animate and inanimate.” Having 
read these characteristics the sage kept them to himself, and mentioned a few 
fabricated ones to the king. Telling the king that his daughter was of good promise, 
Narada left. He thought within himself, “Let me devise and try some means whereby 
the princess may choose me for her husband.” He had no more zeal to practise Japa 
(muttering of sacred formulas) or austerity. “Good God, how am I to get the girl?” he 
said to himself. (1 — 4) 

155


“What is needed on this occasion, is great personal charm and surpassing beauty, 
whereby the princess may be enamoured of me and place the wreath of victory round 
my neck,” he continued. (131) 

“Let me ask Hari for a gift of beauty. But, alas! much time will be lost in going to 
Him. Yet I have no such weel as Hari; let Him, therefore, come to my rescue at this 
juncture.” Then Narada prayed in manifold ways and lo! The sportive and merciful Lord 
appeared before him. The sight was soothing to the sage’s eyes. He was glad at heart 
and felt assured that his object would be accomplished. In great humility he told the Lord 
all that had happened, and said, “Be gracious to me and be good enough to help me. 
Lord, bestow on me Your own beauty; in no other way can I get possession of her. 
Soon do that which may serve my best interests; I am Your own servant, my lord.” Seeing 
the mighty power of His Maya, the Lord, who is compassionate to the poor, smiled to 
himself and said: — (1 — 4) 


“Narada, listen to me; I shall do that alone which is good to you, and nothing else 
My words can never be untrue.” (132) 

156

“Hark, O contemplative ascetic! if a patient distracted by his malady asks for 
something which is harmful to him, the physician would not give it. In a like manner I have 
resolved on doing what is good to you.” So saying, the Lord disappeared. Under the spell 
of His Maya the sage was so mystified that he could not understand even such 
unambiguous words of Sri Hari. The chief of seers hastened to the spot where the arena 
for the choice-marriage had been prepared. Richly adorned, the royal suitors had 
occupied their respective seats, each with his retinue. The sage was glad at heart; for 
he thought within himself, “My beauty is so surpassing that the princess will never 
commit the error of choosing for her husband anyone else than me.” In the sage’s own 
interest the gracious Lord had made him hideous beyond description. But no one could 
mark the change that had taken place in him; everyone knew him to be Narada and 
greeted him as such. (1 — 4) 


Two of Siva’s attendants too happened to be there. They knew the whole secret 
and, disguised as Brahmanas, went about seeing the fun. (133) 

157

Chapter 31
In the row where sat Narada, exceedingly proud of his beauty, the two attendants 
of Mahesa too seated themselves. Being disguised as Brahmanas they could not be 
detected. They flung sarcastic remarks at Narada, saying, “Hari has given this man such 
excellent beauty that the princess will be enamoured to look at it and shall certainly 
choose him, taking him for Hari* Himself.” The sage was under a spell of delusion; for 
his heart had been stolen by love. The attendants of Siva felt amused at this and greatly 
enjoyed the fun. Even though the sage heard their ironical talk, he could not follow it, his 
reason being clouded by infatuation. No one perceived this extra-ordinary phenomenon; 
the princess alone saw his ugly form. The moment she beheld his monkey-like face and 
frightful form she was filled with rage. (1 — 4) 

Accompained by her girl companions the princess then glided as a swan. With 
a wreath of victory in her lotus hands she moved about surveying each of her royal 
suitors. (134) 
* The word ‘Hari’ also means a monkey: the attendants of Siva, therefore, indirectly hinted that the 
sage looked like a monkey. 

158

She did not care to look even casually at the quarter in which Narada sat elated 
with pride. Again and again the sage would raise himself and fidget about; the 
attendants of Hara smiled to see him in that state. The gracious Lord too went there 
in the form of a king; the princess joyfully placed the wreath of victory round His neck. 
The Lord of LaksmT carried off the bride to the despair of all assembled kings. The 
sage felt much perturbed; for infatuation had robbed the sage of his reason. He felt as 
if a gem had dropped from a loosened knot in the end of his garment. The attendants 
of Hara then smilingly said, “Just look at your face in a mirror.” Uttering these words 
both ran away in great alarm and the sage looked at his reflection in water. His fury 
knew no bounds when he beheld his form; and he pronounced a terrible curse on the 
attendants of Siva: — (1 — 4) 

“O you sinful impostors, go and be reborn as demons. You mocked me; therefore, 
reap its reward. Mock again a sage, if you dare. (135) 

Looking again in water, he saw that 
found no solace. His lips quivered and 
proceeded to where the Lord of Laksmi was:

he had regained his real form; yet his heart 
ire was indignation in his heart. At once he 
;. “I shall either curse Him or die at His door,” 




BALA-KANDA 


159 


he said to himself, “seeing that He has made me a butt of ridicule throughout the world.” 
The terror of the demons, Sri Hari, met him right on the way. He was accompanied by 
Goddess Rama and the princess referred to above. The lord of immortals spoke in 
gentle tones, “To what destination, holy sir, are you betaking yourself like one disconsolate” 
As soon as he heard these words Narada was filled with rage. Dominated as he was by 
Maya, there was no reason left in him. He said, “You cannot bear to look upon the good 
fortune of others. You are extremely jealous and guile. While churning the ocean You 
drove Rudra mad and inciting Him through the gods You made Him quaff the poison. 

(1-4) 

“Apportioning intoxicating liquor to the demons and poison to Sankara, You 
appropriated Rama and the lovely gem (Kaustubha) to Yourself. You have ever been 
selfish and perverse, and treacherous in Your dealings.” (136) 

“You are absolutely independent and subordinate to none; therefore You do whatever 
pleases Your mind. You debase a good soul and redeem a vile person and neither rejoice 
nor grieve over it. Deceiving everyone You have become habituated to such tricks. You 
entertain no fear and are always zealous in pursuing Your object. Good and evil deeds do 
not come in Your way; no one has so far been able to correct You. You have this time 
played with fire and shall reap what You have sown. Take that very form in which You have 
imposed upon me: this is my curse. You made me look like a monkey; therefore You shall 
have monkeys for Your helpmates. And as You have grievously wronged me, so shall You 
suffer the pangs of separation from Your wife.” (1 — 4) 




160 

Gladly accepting the curse, the compassionate Lord made many entreaties to the 
sage, and withdrew the irresistible charm of His Maya. (137) 

When Sri Hari lifted the spell of His Maya, there was neither Rama nor the 
princess to be seen by His side. In dire dismay the sage then clasped the feet of Hari 
and said, “O Reliever of the distress of the suppliant, save me! O gracious lord! let my 
curse prove ineffectual.” “It was My will,” replied the Lord, who is so merciful to the 
humble. “I poured many abuses at You,” the sage repeated, “how shall my sins be 
expiated? “Go and repeat the names of Sankara a hundred times; your heart will be 
disburdened at once. No one is so dear to Me as Siva: never give up this belief even 
by mistake. O sage, he who does not earn the good-will of Siva shall never attain true 
devotion to Me. Bearing this in mind, go and perambulate the globe. My Maya shall haunt 
you no more.” (1 — 4) 


Having thus reassured the sage, the Lord then disappeared; while Narada 
proceeded to Satyaloka (the seventh paradise, the abode of Brahma) chanting Sri 
Rama’s praises as he went. (138) 




BALA-KANDA 


161 

Chapter 32

When the attendants of Siva saw the sage moving along the way free from delusion 
and greatly delighted at heart, they approached him in great fer and, clasping his feet, 
entreated piteously, “We are servants of Siva and no Brahmanas, O great sage; we 
committed a great sin and have reaped its fruit. Now rid us of the curse, O benevolent 
sage.” Narada, who was full of compassion to the humble, replied, “Both of you go and 
take the form of demons. You shall possess an enormous fortune, grandeur and strength. 
When you have subdued the universe by the might of your arm, God Visnu shall take 
a human form. Dying at His hands in battle, you shall be liberated and shall never be 
reborn.” Bowing their head at the sage’s feet, both departed and were reborn as demons 
in due course. (1 — 4) 


In one Kalpa (round of creation) it was for this reason that Lord Sri Hari assumed 
a human form as. It is His vow to gladden the gods, to delight the virtuous and to ease 
the earth of its burden. (139) 

162
Thus Sri Hari’s births and exploits are many; they are all charming, delightful and 
marvellous. In every cycle of creation the Lord manifests Himself and enacts lovely 
sports of various kinds; and the great sages have on each such occasion sung His story 
in most sacred strains, relating wonderful anecdotes of diverse kinds, hearing which the 
allise marvel not. Infinite is Sri Hari and infinite are His stories; each sain sings and hears 
them in divergent ways. The lovely sports of Ramacandra cannot be sung even in crores 
of Kalpas.This episode, O Bhavani, has been narrated by me in order to show that even 
enlightened sages are deluded by Sri Hari’s Maya. The Lord is sportive and a friend of 
the suppliant; He is easy to serve and rids one of all sorrows. (1 — 4) 

There is no god, man or sage whom Sri Hari’s powerful Maya cannot infatuate. 
Bearing this in mind, one should adore the Lord of this great Maya. (140) 

163 

Hear, O daughter of the mountain-king, another reason why the unbegotten, 
unqualified and formless Brahma became king of Ayodhya. I shall relate at length the 
marvellous story connected with it. The Lord whom you saw roaming in the forest with 
His brother (Laksmana) in the garb of hermits, and whose doings drove you mad in the 
form of Sati to such an extent that the shadow of that madness haunts you even to this 
day — hear His exploits, which serve as a cure for the disease of delusion. The sportive 
deeds that were performed by the Lord in that birth, I shall relate them all to the best of 
My talents. Hearing Sankara’s words, O Bharadvaja, Lima blushed and smiled with love. 
Siva (who has a bull emblazoned on His standard) then began to relate the cause of the 
Lord’s descent on that particular occasion. (1 — 4) 


I proceed to tell you all about it, O Bharadvaja; listen attentively. The story of Sri 
Rama wipes out all the impurities of the Kali age, brings forth all blessings and is most 
charming. (141) 

Swayambhuva* Manu had Satarupa as wife; of them was born this peerless human 
race, in God’s creation. The piety and conduct of the pair were excellent; the standard 
of morality set up by them is sung by the Vedas even to this day. Their son was king 

* So-called because he was born of Swayambhu (the self-born Brahma). It is stated in the Puranas 
that the Creator divided himself into two halves, one of which was a male and the other a female. The former 
was known by the name of Swayambhuva and the other as Satarupa. He was the first of the fourteen Manus 
who rule over God’s creation in succession, each holding office for 71 .1/2 Caturyugas or repetitions of the four 
Yugas. 

164



Uttanapada, who begot the celebrated devotee of Sri Hari, Dhruva. Manu’s younger son 
was known as Priyavrata, who is mentioned with praise by the Vedas and the Puranas. 
They had a daughter too, Devahuti by name, who was the belord consort of the sage 
Kardama, and who bore in her womb the all-powerful and benevolent Lord Kapila the 
primal divinity, who is compassionate to the humble and who openly expounded the 
philosophy of Sankhya, an adept as He was in the enquiry after the ultimate principles. 
The said Manu ruled for a long period and followed the Lord’s commandments (in the form 
of the scriptural ordinance) in everyway. (1 — 4) 



“I have reached the fourth stage of my life (old age) while I am still living under the 
roof of my house as a householder; but I have not yet lost my relish for the pleasures 
of sense,” he said to himself. He felt sore distressed at heart that his life had been 
wasted without devotion to Sri Hari. (142) 


Manu then perforce resigned the throne to his son and departed for the forest with 
his wife. Pre-eminent of all holy places is the celebrated Naimisaranya (the modern 
Nimsar in Oudh), which is most sacred and bestows success on those striving for 
realization. Multitudes of sages and adepts lived there. Glad of heart, king Manu 
proceeded to that place. Passing along the way, the king and queen of resolute mind 
looked like incarnations of spiritual wisdom and devotion respectively. On reaching the 
bank of the Gomati they bathed with delight in the limpid stream. Adepts and enlightened 
sages came to see him, recognizing in the royal sage a champion of virtue. The sages 
reverently took them to all holy and lovely spots that were scattered here and there. With 

165 


emaciated bodies and clad in hermits’ robes they daily listened to the Puranas in the 
assembly of saints. (1 — 4) 

They further devoutly repeated the twelve-lettered formula ( &> -^ft *iwr aiydaH ). 
Their mind was fondly devoted to the lotus feet of Lord Vasudeva (the all-pervading 
Visnu). (143) 


They lived on vegetables, fruits and roots and meditated on Brahma (the Absolute), 
who is truth, consciousness and bliss combined. Again, they started undergoing 
penance for the sake of Sri Hari, giving up roots and fruits for water alone, Their heart 
ever clamoured, “Let us see with our eyes that supreme Lord who is without attributes, 
without parts and without beginning or end, who is contemplated upon by the exponents 
of the highest reality, whom the Vedas describe in negative terms such as ‘Not this, not 
this’, who is bliss itself, unconditioned and without comparison, and from a particle of 
whose being emanate a number of Sambhus, Virancis and Visnus.” Even such a Lord 
is subordinate to the will of His devotees and assumes for their sake a form suitable 
for sport. If the above utterance of the Vedas is true, our desire will be surely 
accomplished. (1 — 4) 

166

In this way six thousand years elapsed even while they lived on water. Then for 
another seven millennia they lived on air alone. (144) 

For ten thousand years they refused to inhale even air (i.e. , held their breath) and 
remained standing on one leg. Beholding their great penance Brahma, Hari and Hara 
repeatedly called on Manu and tempted him in many ways, saying “Ask for a boon.” But 
the king and queen were most resolute and did not swerve in spite of the deities’ efforts 
to deflect them from their course. Although their frame had been reduced to a mere 
skeleton there was not the least anguish in their heart. The omniscient Lord now 
recognized the king and queen as His own servants. The ascetic couple solely 
depended on Him. In the meantime a most deep voice thundered from heaven, “Ask, ask 
for a boon.” The voice was steeped in the nectar of compassion and was so charming 
that it infused life into the dead. Entering through the cavity of the ears when it reached 
their very heart, they found their body attractive, animated and robust as before, as if 
they had just returned from home. (1 — 4) 

As the royal couple heard these words, which were delightful to the ear as nectar 
itself, the hair on their body bristled and a thrill ran through their limbs. Then, falling 
prostrate on the ground and with his heart overflowing with love Manu spoke: — (145) 

167

Chapter 33

“Listen, O Lord! You are a wish-yielding tree and a cow of plenty to Your servants. 
The dust below Your feet is adored by Brahma, Hari and Hara. You are easy to serve 
and a fountain of all blessings. You are the protector of the suppliant and the lord of all 
creation, both animate and inanimate. O friend of the forlorn, if You have any affection for 
us, be pleased to grant this boon to us. The form which dwells in Siva’s heart and is 
sought by sages, which sports like a swan in the lake of Bhusundi’s mind and is glorified 
by the Vedas as both with and without attributes — be gracious to us and let us feast our 
eyes on that form; O Reliever of the distress of the suppliant.” The soft and humble 
words of the royal couple, steeped as they were in the nectar of love, were liked by the 
Lord very much. Full of affection for His devotees and a storehouse of compassion, the 
all-powerful Lord, who pervades the whole universe, manifested Himself. (1 — 4) 

Billions and millions of Loves blushed to behold the elegance of His swarthy form, 
which resembled a blue lotus (in the softness of its touch), a sapphire (in its gloss) and 
a dark cloud (in its freshness). (146) 

168


His countenance, which resembled the autumnal full moon, was the very perfection 
of beauty. Lovely were His cheeks and chin and His neck resembled the conch-shell in 
its spiral shape. His ruddy lips, teeth and nose were charming. His smile put to shame 
the rays of the moon. His eyes possessed the exquisite beauty of fresh-blown lotuses 
and His lovely glance captivated the heart. His eyebrows stole the beauty of Love’s bow 
and a sectarian mark shone on His forehead. Fish-shaped ear-rings hung from his ear- 
lobes and a crown adorned His head. His curly locks looked like a swarm of bees. His 
breast was marked by a curl of hair and adorned with a beautiful wreath of sylvan 
flowers, a string of precious stones and other jewelled ornaments. His strong and well- 
built shoulders resembled that of a lion and the lovely sacred thread was suspended from 
it. His long beautiful arms resembled the trunk of an elephant. The ornaments adorning 
them were also charming. A quiver was tied to His waist and His hands bore an arrow 
and a bow. (1 — 4) 

His yellow robes put to shame streaks of lightning and His belly had three- 
folds; while His attractive navel robbed, as it were, the eddies on the Yamuna of their 
beauty. (147) 

169

His lotus feet, which attract the minds of sages like so many bees, were beyond 
description. On His left side shone His primordial energy, Sita, who is ever devoted to 
Him, and who is a storehouse of beauty and the source of the universe. Sita, who stood 
to the left of Sri Rama, was the same from a fragment of whose being emanate countless 
Laksmis, Umas and Brahmanis (Sarasvatis), all mines of virtues, and the mere play of 
whose eyebrows brings the cosmos into existence. On the form of Sri Hari, the ocean 
of beauty, Manu and Satarupa gazed intently with unblinking eyes. That incomparable 
beauty they looked on with reverence and would not feel sated with it. Overcome with 
joy they lost consciousness of their body and fell flat on the ground, clasping His feet 
with their hands. The gracious Lord touched their heads with His own lotus hands and 
lifted them up at once. (1 — 4) 


The compassionate Lord then said, “Knowing that I am highly pleased with you 
and recognizing Me as a great donor, ask whatever boon you will.” (148) 


On hearing the words of the Lord, Manu joined his palms and summoning courage 
spoke in soft accents, “Now that we have seen Your lotus feet, all our desires have been 
fulfilled. Yet one ardent longing still lingers in my heart. It is easy of accomplishment and 

170


at the same time hard to attain; hence it cannot be expressed. O Lord, it is easy for You 
to grant it; but due to my wretched condition it appears to me so hard to attain. Just as 
a pauper who has found a wish-yielding tree feels shy in asking for abundant wealth, little 
realizing its glory, even so my heart is possessed by doubt. Being the witness of all 
hearts, You know my mind; therefore, O my master, fulfil my desire.” “O king, ask of Me 
unreservedly; there is nothing which I would not give you.” (1 — 4) 


“O crest-jewel of donors, O gracious lord, I tell You my sincere wish: I would have 
a son like You. I can have nothing to conceal from You.” (149) 

On seeing his love and hearing his invaluable words, the compassionate Lord 
said, “Amen. But where shall I go to find My equal? I Myself, O king, shall be a son to 
you.” Then, seeing Satarupa with her hands still folded, He said, “O good lady, ask 
whatever boon you please.” “O gracious Lord, the boon which the clever king has just 
asked has appealed to me much. But it is great presumption, my Lord, even though such 
presumption is liked by You, O friend of the devotees. You are the progenitor even of 
Brahma and other gods, the lord of the universe and the Supreme Being who dwells 
within the heart of all. Realizing this, my mind is filled with doubt; but what You have said 
is infallible. O my master, the bliss that is enjoyed and the goal that is reached by your 
own devotees — (1 — 4) 

171

“Grant me in Your mercy, O Lord, that very bliss the same destiny, the same 
devotion, the same attachment to Your feet, the same insight and the same mode of 
living.” (150) 

Hearing the soft, pregnant, charming and excellent speech of Satarupa, the 
gracious Lord gently replied, “Whatever desire you cherish in your mind I have granted; 
you should have no doubt about it. Mother, by My grace your uncommon wisdom shall 
never fail.” Bowing at His feet, Manu again said, “Lord, I have one more request to make. 
Let me have attachment to Your feet, of the same type as one has for a son, no matter 
if anyone calls me a big fool. Just as a snake cannot live without the gem on its hood 
and a fish without water, even so let my life be dependent on You (let me not survive 
without You).” Asking this boon, the king remained clasping the Lord’s feet till the All- 
merciful said, “Let it be so. Now, obeying My command go and dwell in the capital of Indra 
(the chief of gods).” (1 — 4) 


“Having enjoyed extensive enjoyments there you shall, after some time, be born 
as king of Ayodhya; then, odear one, I will be your son.” (151) 

172

“Voluntarily assuming human guise I will manifest Myself in your house. Bodying 
Myself forth with My drayments I will perform sportive acts which will be a source of 
delight to My devotees. Hearing of such exploits with reverence blessed men shall cross 
the ocean of worldly existence, renouncing the feeling of meum and arrogance. This 
Maya, who is no other than My primordial energy that has brought forth the universe, too 
will manifest Herself. In this way I will accomplish your desire and this pledge of Mine shall 
never, never, never fail.” Repeating this again and again, the gracious Lord vanished out 
of sight. Cherishing in their mind the image of the Lord who is so compassionate to His 
devotees, the wedded couple stayed in that hermitage for some time more. And dropping 
their body, when the time came, without the least pain they went and took their abode 
in Amaravati, the city of immortals. (1 — 4) 
This most sacred legend was related by Siva (who has a bull emblazoned on His 
standard) to Uma. Bharadvaja, now hear yet another cause of Sri Rama’s birth. (152) 

173

Listen, 0 sage, to an old and sacred legend which was narrated by Sambhu to 
Girija.There was a principality known by the name of Kaikaya, which was celebrated 
throughout the world. A king named Satyaketu ruled there. He was a champion of virtue, 
a storehouse of political wisdom, dignified, glorious, amiable and powerful. He had two 
gallant sons, who were repositories of all virtues and most staunch in battle. The elder 
of the two and the heir to the throne was named Pratapabhanu. The other was known 
by the name of Arimardana, who was unequalled in strength of arm and steady in battle. 
There was perfect unity between the two brothers and the affection each bore to the 
other was free from all blemish and guile. To the elder son the king resigned the throne 
and withdrew himself into the forest for the sake of devotion to Sri Hari. (1 — 4) 

When Pratapabhanu became king, a proclamation to this effect was made throughout 
the land. He looked after his subjects with utmost care according to the precepts of the 
Vedas and there was not a speck of sin anywhere (in his kingdom). (153) 

174


174 
The prime minister, Dharmaruci by name, was a second Sukra* and was as 
devoted to the king as he was wise. With a prudent counseller and a gallant and powerful 
brother, the king himself was an embodiment of glory and daring in war. He owned a vast 
army consisting of horse and foot, chariots and elephants. It had numberless excellent 
warriors all of whom fought fearlessly in battle. The king rejoiced to see his army and there 
was a tumultuous sound of kettledrums. He collected a special force for the conquest of 
the world, and availing himself of an auspicious day marched forth with beat of drums. 
A number of battles were fought here and there and all hostile kings were brought to their 
knees by superior might. By the strength of his arm be reduced all the seven sections 
of the terrestrial region and let the princes go on payment of tribute. Now Pratapabhanu 
was the undisputed sovereign of the entire globe. (1 — 4) 
Having thus subjugated the whole universe by the might of his arm, the king re- 
entered his capital. He indulges in the pleasures of wealth, religious practices and sense- 
gratification etc., at the appropriate time. (154) 
Secured by king Pratapabhanu’s might, the charming earth became a cow of 
plenty as it were (yielded all one’s coveted products). The people were happy and 
free from all sorrows and both men and women were good-looking and virtuous. The 
minister, Dharmaruci, was devoted to the feet of Sri Hari; in the interest of his king he 
* The celebrated preceptor of the Daityas, who is noted for his political insight and is credited with the 
authorship of the famous work on political science, SukranTti. 

BALA-KANDA 
Chapter 34

175 

advised him on state policy everyday. Preceptors, gods, saints, manes and Brahmanas — 
the king invariably served them all. Whatever duties have been enjoined on a king in the 
Vedas, he gladly and devoutly performed. He bestowed gifts of various kinds everyday and 
listened to the best scriptures including the Vedas and the Puranas. In all holy places he 
constructed many small and big wells and tanks, flower gardens and lovely orchards, 
dwellings for the Brahmanas and beautiful temples of wonderful architecture. (1 — 4) 
Whatever sacrifices have been enjoined in the Vedas and the Puranas, the king 
devoutly performed each one of them a thousand times. (155) 
There was no seeking for any reward in his heart; the king was a man of great 
discrimination and wisdom. Whatever meritorious act he performed in thought, word or 
deed, the wise king dedicated it to Lord Vasudeva (the all-pervading God Visnu). 
Equipping himself with all the outfit of hunting, the king mounted a gallant steed one day 
and, entering the dense forest of the Vindhya range, killed many a sacred animals. While 
ranging in the wood he espied a wild boar. It looked as if with the moon in his mouth 
the demon Rahu had hid in the forest. The orb was too large to be contained in the mouth, 
yet in his rage he would not disgorge it. Thus have I chosen to portray the beauty of the 
frightful tusks of the boar, while its body too was of an enormous size and bulk. Growling 
at the tramp of the horse and pricking up its ears it gazed with a startled look. (1 — 4) 

176 



On seeing the huge boar, which resembled a purple mountain-peak, the king 
whipped the horse and advanced rapidly, challenging the boar at the same time and 
saying it could no longer escape. (156) 

When it saw the horse coming on with a great noise, the boar took to flight swift as 
wind. The king lost no time in fitting the arrow to his bow and the boar crouched as soon as 
it saw the shaft. The king discharged his arrows taking a steady aim each time, but the boar 
saved itself by its wiliness. The beast rushed on, now hiding and now emerging into view; 
while the king in much excitement followed closely on its track. The boar went afar into a 
dense thicket, which was impenetrable by elephant or horse. Even though the king was all 
by himself and was faced with untold hardships in the forest, still he would not abandon the 
chase. Seeing the king so determined, the boar slunk away into a deep mountain-cave. 
When the king perceived that there was no access to the cave, he had to return much 
disappointed; and, what was worse, he lost his track in the great forest. (1 — 4) 

Exhausted with much exertion and oppressed by hunger and thirst, the king and his 
horse kept searching for a stream or pond and almost fainted for want of water. (157) 

BALA-KANDA 


177 

While wandering in the forest he espied a hermitage. In that hermitage dwelt, 
in the disguise of a hermit, a monarch who had been despoiled of his kingdom by 
Pratapabhanu and who had run away from the field of battle deserting his army. Knowing 
that the time was propitious for Pratapabhanu and most unfavourable to his own self, 
he felt much disgusted at heart and refused to return home; and he was too proud 
to come to terms with the victor. Suppressing the anger in his own heart the ex-king 
lived in the forest like a pauper in the garb of an anchorite. It was to him that king 
Pratapabhanu went and he for his part immediately recognized that the newcomer was 
no other than Pratapabhanu. Overcome by thirst, the latter, however, could not recognize 
the ex-king. Perceiving his holy garb Pratapabhanu took him to be a great sage and, 
getting down from his horse, made obeisance to him. The king was, however, too astute 
to disclose his name. (1 — 4) 

Seeing king Pratapabhanu thirsty, he showed him a good lake and the king as well 
as his horse gladly bathed in it and drank from it. (158) 
178 

The whole fatigue was gone and the king heaved a sigh of relief. The hermit 
thereafter took him back to his hermitage; and perceiving that it was sunset now he gave 
him a seat and then spoke to him in polite terms, “Who are you and wherefore do you 
risk your life by roaming in the forest all alone, even though you are so young and 
handsome? Reading the marks of an emperor on your person I am moved with great 
pity.” “Listen, O great sage: there is a king named Pratapabhanu; I am his minister. 
Ranging in pursuit of hunt I have lost my way and by great good fortune I have been led 
into your presence. Your sight is a rare boon to me; it leads me to believe that something 
good is about to befall me.” The hermit said, “It is now dusk, my son; and your city is 
five hundred and sixty miles away. (1 — 4) 
 “Listen, O wise: dark and dreary is the night, and the forest is dense and trackless; 
knowing this, tarry here overnight and depart in the morning.” (159 A) 


The inevitable, says Tulasidasa, is invariably preceded by circumstances that are 
favourable to it. Either it comes to a man or takes him to the cause of his doom. (1 59 B) 
BALA-KANDA 
179 
“Very well, my lord,” the king replied; and bowing to the hermit’s command he tied 
up the horse to a tree and then sat down. The king extolled him in many ways and 
bowing at his feet congratulated himself. He then spoke to him in soft and endearing 
terms, “Regarding you as a father, my lord, I venture to address you. Looking upon me 
as your son and servant O great sage, pray tell me your name in full, my master.” 
Although the king did not recognize him, he recognized the king. While the king had a 
guileless heart, the hermit was a pastmaster in fraud. Being an enemy in the first 
instance, and a Ksatriya on top of it and again of royal blood, he sought to accomplish 
his end by dint of his cunning. The thought of the pleasures of royalty had made the 
enemy king sad; the fire of jealousy smouldered within his heart like that of a furnace. 
On hearing the artless words of Pratapabhanu and recalling the grudge he had nursed 
against him, the hermit felt delighted at heart. (1 — 4) 
He uttered the following soft yet false and artful words, “My name is now Bhikhari 
(a mendicant), penniless and homeless as I am.” (160) 

180 


The king replied, “Those who are repositories of wisdom and free from pride like 
you always keep their reality concealed; even though proficient in everyway, they prefer 
to remain in tattered clothes. That is why saints as well as the Vedas proclaim that 
those who are supremely indigent are held most dear by Sri Hari. Penniless and homeless 
beggars like you fill the minds of even Viranci and Siva with doubt. Whoever you may 
be, I bow at Your feet; now be gracious to me, my lord.” When the hermit saw the 
king’s artless affection and extraordinary faith in him, he won him over in everyway, 
and spoke with a still greater affection “Listen, O king; I tell you sincerely that I have 
dwelt here for long. (1 — 4) 

“No one has come to me so far nor do I make myself known to anyone; 
for popular esteem is like a wild fire, which consumes the forest of penance (i.e., 
neutralizes it).” (161 A) 
Not only fools, says TulasTdasa, but even clever men are taken in by fair 
appearances. Look at the beautiful peacock: though its notes are sweet like nectar, it 
devours snakes. (161 B) 

BALA-KANDA 
181 
“That is why I live in this world away from the public gaze. I have little to do with 
anything other than Sri Hari. The Lord knows everything without being told; tell me, then, 
what is to be gained by humouring the world. You are sincere and intelligent and are therefore 
supremely dear to me; and I too have earned your affection and confidence. Now, my son, 
if I were to keep anything from you, I shall incur the most severe blame.” The more the 
hermit talked of his indifference to the world the more trustful grew the king. When the false 
anchorite saw the king devoted to him in thought, word and deed, he said, “My name, 
brother, is Ekatanu.” Hearing this, the king bowed his head and asked further, “Kindly explain 
to me the meaning of this appellation recognizing me as your faithful servant.” (1 — 4) 
“My birth took place at the first dawn of creation. Since then I have never taken 
another body; that is why I am called Ekatanu.” (162) 

“Marvel not, my son, to hear this; for nothing is too difficult to obtain through 
penance. By dint of penance Brahma creates the universe; by dint of penance Visnu 
assumed the role of its protector. By dint of penance, again, Sambhu destroys the world; 
there is nothing in this world which cannot be attained through penance.” Hearing this, 
the king felt much enamoured and the hermit commenced relating old legends. Having 
discussed topics of Karma (action) and Dharma (duty) and told many legends bearing 
on them he discoursed on dispassion and knowledge. And he further related at length 
countless marvellous stories connected with the creation, maintenance and dissolution 
of the universe. Hearing all this the king completely yielded to the influence of the hermit 
and then proceeded to tell him his real name. Said the hermit, “O king, I know you. Even 
though you tried to deceive me, I appreciated this move on your part.” (1 — 4) 




182 

“O king, the political maxim is that kings should not disclose their name in all cases. 
And when I thought of your political sagacity, I conceived great love for you.” (163) 

“Your name is Pratapabhanu; king Satyaketu was your father. O king, by the 
grace of my preceptor I know everything; but foreseeing my own harm I refuse to tell 
everything I know. When I saw your natural straightforwardness, affection, faith and 
political wisdom, I conceived a spontaneous affection for you; and that is why I told you 
my own story on your asking. I am now pleased; doubt not and ask what you will, O 
king.” Hearing these agreeable words, the king rejoiced and, clasping the hermit’s feet, 
supplicated to him in many ways. “O gracious sage, by your very sight I have within my 
grasp all the four ends of human existence (viz., religious merit, wealth, enjoyment and 
final beatitude). Yet, as I see my lord so gracious, I would ask a boon which is impossible 
to attain otherwise, and thereby overcome sorrow.” (1 — 4) 
“Let my body be free from old age, death and suffering; let no one vanquish me 
in battle and let me enjoy undisputed sovereignty over the globe for a hundred Kalpas 
(repetitions of creation) and let me have no enemies.” (164) 




BALA-KANDA 


183 

Said the anchorite, “So be it, O king. But there is one difficulty; hear it too. Even Death 
shall bow his head at your feet (much more those who are subject to death). The only 
exception shall be the Brahmanas, O ruler of the earth. The Brahmanas are ever powerful 
by virtue of their penance; no one can deliver from their wrath. If you can propitiate the 
Brahmanas to your will, O king, even Brahma, Visnu and the great Lord Siva shall be at your 
command. Might is of no avail against the Brahmanas; with both arms raised to heaven I tell 
you this truth. Listen, O sovereign; if you escape the Brahmana’s curse, you shall never 
perish.” Hearing his words, the king rejoiced and said, “My lord, I shall no longer die. By your 
grace, O benevolent master, I shall be blessed at all times.” (1 — 4) 

“Amen!” said the false anchorite, and added with crafty intent, “If you tell anyone 
about my meeting with you and your straying away, the fault shall not be mine.” (165) 

184 
“I warn you, O king, because great harm shall befall you if you relate this incident 
to anyone. If this talk happens to reach a third pair of ears, I tell you the truth, you are 
doomed. O Pratapabhanu, if you divulge this secret or if a Brahmana curses you, you 
are undone. In no other way shall you die, even if Sri Hari and Hara get angry with you.” 
“It is true, my lord,” said the king, clasping the hermit’s feet. “Tell me, who can deliver 
from the wrath of a Brahmana or a spiritual preceptor? A Guru can save one even if one 
has evoked the wrath of Brahma; but in the event of a quarrel with one’s preceptor there 
is no one in the world who can save. If I do not follow your advice, let me perish; I care 
not. My mind is disturbed by only one fear; the curse of a Brahmana, my lord, is 
something most terrible.” (1 — 4) 

“How shall I be able to win over the Brahmanas? Kindly tell me that too. I see no 
well wishes other than you, my gracious lord.” (166) 


BALA-KANDA 
 185 

“Listen, O king: there are various expedients in this world. But they are hard to 
accomplish and are of doubtful issue besides. Of course, there is one very simple 
device; but that too involves one difficulty. Its contrivance depends on me; but my going 
to your city is out of the question. Ever since I was born I have never been to anybody’s 
house or village so far. And if I do not go, it will be a misfortune for you. I am therefore 
in a dilemma today.” Hearing this, the king replied in a polite language, “My lord, there 
is a maxim laid down in the Vedas: the great show kindness to the small. Mountains 
always bear tiny blades of grass on their tops, the fathomless ocean carries floating foam 
on its breast and the earth ever bears dust on its bosom.” (1 — 4) 
So saying, the king clasped the hermit’s feet and said, “Be gracious to me, my 
master. You are a saint, compassionate to the humble; therefore, my lord, take this 
trouble on my behalf.” (167) 

Knowing that the king was completely under his influence, the hermit, who was 
clever at deception, said, “Listen, O king: I tell you the truth. For me in this world there 
is nothing hard to obtain. I will surely accomplish your object, devoted as you are in 
thought, word and deed to me. The power of Yoga (contemplation), planning, penance 
and mystic formulas work only when secrecy is maintained about them. O king, if I cook 
food and you serve it and if nobody comes to know me, whoever tastes the food so 
prepared shall become amenable to your orders. Again, I tell you, whosoever dines at the 
house of such people shall, O king, be dominated by your will. Go and operate this 
scheme, O king, and take this vow for a whole year. (1 — 4) 




186 
“Everyday invite a new set of a hundred thousand Brahmanas with their families; 
while I, so long as your vow lasts, shall provide the daily banquet.” (168) 

“In this way O king, with little exertion all the Brahmanas shall be proptiate to your 
will. The Brahmanas in their turn will offer oblations into the sacred fire, perform big 
sacrifices and practise adoration; and through that channel the gods too shall be easily 
won over. I give you one more sign. I will never come in this form. By my delusive power, 
O king, I will carry off your family priest and, making him just like myself by dint of my 
penance, will keep him here for the year; while I, O king, will take his form and manage 
everything for you. The night is far gone, so you had better retire now; on the third day 
we will meet again. By my penitential power I will convey you home, both you and your 
horse, even while you are asleep.” (1 — 4) 
“I will come in the form I have told you, and you will recognize me when I call you 
aside and remind you of all this.” (169) 




BALA-KANDA 


187 

The king went to sleep in obedience to the hermit; while the counterfeit sage 
returned to his own seat and sat down there. Deep sleep came upon the weary monarch; 
but how could the other fellow sleep, distracted as he was with anxiety. The demon 
Kalaketu made his appearance there; it was he who had assumed the form of a boar and 
led the king astray. A great friend of the hermit-king, he was skilled in manifold ways of 
deceit. He had a hundred sons and ten brothers, who were great villains, invincible and 
annoying to the gods. Seeing the Brahmanas, saints and gods in distress the king had 
already killed them all in battle. Recalling the old grudge the wretch conspired with the 
hermit-king and contrived a plot for the extermination of the enemy; but, as fate would 
have it, the king knew nothing of it. (1 — 4) 
A spirited foe, even though left alone, should not be lightly regarded. The demon Rahu,* who has nothing left of him but his head, is able to torment both the sun and moon even to this day. (170) 
* According to the Hindu belief a solar or lunar eclipse takes place only when in the astral plane the demon Rahu, a sworn enemy of both the sun-god and the moon-god, devours the one or the other either wholly or partly. The demon, however consists of the head alone, his trunk having been cut off by God Visnu while he was unlawfully attempting to partake of the nectar which was being served to the gods. Since, however, he had already tasted the nectar, the head became immortal. 




188 

The hermit-king was delighted to see his ally and rose to meet him. The meeting 
gave him much satisfaction and he related the whole story to his friend. The demon too 
was glad and said, “Listen, O king: since you have followed my advice, take the enemy 
as subdued. Cease to worry now and lay yourself to rest. God has effected a cure 
without the use of a medicine, I will sweep away the enemy root and branch and see you 
on the fourth day.” Fully reassuring the hermit-king, the arch-impostor, who was highly 
irascible, departed. In an instant he conveyed Pratapabhanu to his palace, horse and all. 
Putting the king to bed beside his queen, he tied up the horse in the stall in the proper 
way. (1 — 4) 

Again he carried off the king’s family-priest and, depriving him of his senses by his 
supernatural power, kept him in a mountain-cave. (171) 


BALA-KANDA 


189 

Himself assuming the form of the family-priest, the demon went and lay down on 
the former’s sumptuous bed. The king woke even before daybreak and felt much 
astonished to find himself at home. Attributing the miracle to the glory of the sage, he got 
up quietly, unperceived by the queen. Mounting the same horse he rode off to the woods 
without any man or woman of the city knowing it. When it was midday, the king returned; 
there was rejoicing and festal music in every house. When the king saw his family-priest, 
he looked at him in amazement, recollecting the object he held so dear to his heart. The 
interval of three days hung heavy on the monarch as an age, his mind being set on the 
feet of the false anchorite. At the appointed time the priest came and reminded him in 
detail of all that had been agreed upon. (1 — 4) 

The king was delighted to recognize his preceptor (in the priest’s form); his mind 
was too clouded to have any sense left. At once he invited a hundred thousand chosen 
Brahmanas with their families. (172) 

The priest cooked four kinds of foods with six different tastes as mentioned in the 




190 

Vedas. He prepared an illusory banquet and a variety of seasoned dishes more than one 
could count. Dressing the flesh of a variety of animals the wretch mixed with it the cooked 
flesh of Brahmanas. All the invited Brahmanas were then called for the dinner. Their feet 
were duly washed and they were respectfully shown to their places. The moment the king 
began to serve the food, a (fictitious) voice from heaven (raised by the demon Kalaketu 
himself) said, “Up, up, Brahmanas! and return to your homes. Taste not this food; it is 
most harmful. The dishes include the flesh of the Brahmanas. ”Up rose all the Brahmanas 
believing the ethereal voice. The king lost his nerve; his mind was bewildered with 
infatuation. As fate would have it, he could not utter a word. (1 — 4) 

Then exclaimed the Brahmanas in wrath, without a second thought, “O foolish king, 
go and take birth in the demon’s form, you and all your family.” (173) 

“O vile Ksatriya! inviting the Brahmanas you were out to ruin them with their 
families. But God has preserved our sanctity; it is you and your race that are undone. 
In the course of a year you shall perish; and not a soul shall be left in your family to 
offer water to gratify your spirit.” Hearing the curse the king was sore stricken with 
fear. Again, a voice was heard from heaven, “O holy Brahmanas you have uttered this 
curse without careful thought; the king has committed no crime.” The Brahmanas were 
astounded when they heard the ethereal voice. The king hastened to the kitchen. 
There was neither any food there nor the Brahmana cook. The king returned in deep 
thought. He related the whole story to the Brahmanas and threw himself on the ground 
frantic with fear. (1 — 4) 

BALA-KANDA 


191 


“Even though you are guiltless, O king, what is inevitable fails not. A Brahmana’s 
curse is very terrible; no amount of effort can counteract it.” (174) 

Chapter 35
So saying, all the Brahmanas dispersed. When the people of the city received the 
news, they were much perturbed and began to blame Providence, who had begun upon 
a swan and produced a crow instead. Conveying the priest to his house, the demon 
(Kalaketu) communicated the tidings to the hermit. The wretch in his turn despatched 
letters in all directions and a host of princes hastened with their troops martially arrayed 
and, beating their kettledrums, beleaguered the city. Everyday battles were fought in 
diverse forms. All his champions fought valiantly and fell. And the king with his brother 
bit the dust. Not one of Satyaketu’s family survived; a Brahmana’s curse can never fail. 
Having vanquished the foe and re-inhabiting the city all the chiefs returned to their own 
capitals enriched with victory and fame. (1 — 4) 
Listen, O Bharadvaja: whosoever incurs the displeasure of heaven, for him a grain 
of dust becomes vast as Mount Meru, a father becomes frightful as Yama (the god of 
death) and rope a snake. (175) 




192 
O sage, in due time, I tell you, this king, with his family, was born as a demon. 
He had ten heads and twenty arms. His name was Ravana; he was a formidable 
hero. The king’s younger brother, Arimardana by name, became the powerful 
Kumbhakarna. His minister, who was known as Dharmaruci, became Ravana’s 
younger half-brother, Vibhisana by name, who is known to the whole world as a 
devotee of God Visnu and a repository of wisdom. And the king’s sons and servants, 
they were born as fierce demon crew. These wretches could take any shape they 
liked and belonged to various orders. They were all wicked, monstrous and devoid 
of sense and were ruthless, bloody and sinful. They were a torment to all creation 
beyond what words can tell. (1 — 4) 

Even though they were born in the incomparably pure and holy line of the 
sage Pulastya, yet, on account of the Brahmana’s curse, they were all embodiments 
of sin. (176) 



BALA-KANDA 


193 

All the three brothers practised austerities of various kinds, most severe beyond all 
description. Seeing their penance the Creator drew nigh and said to the eldest of them, 
“Ask a boon, dear son.” The ten-headed Ravana suppliantly clasped his feet and 
addressed to him the following words. “Listen, O lord of the universe; my prayer is that 
I should die at the hands of none save monkeys and men.” “So be it; you have done great 
penance.” This was the boon Brahma and I granted to him (said Siva). The Creator then 
approached Kumbhakarna and was astonished to see his gigantic form. Brahma said to 
himself, “Should this wretch have his daily repast, the whole world will be no more.” So 
Brahma directed Sarada, who changed his mind. Accordingly the demon asked for 
continued sleep, extending over six months. (1 — 4) 

Last of all Brahma went up to Vibhisana and said, “Ask a boon, my son.” He asked 
for pure love for the lotus feet of the Lord. (177) 
194 

Having granted them boons Brahma went away, while they returned to their home 
rejoicing. The demon Maya had a daughter, Mandodari by name, who was exceedingly 
beautiful, a jewel of womankind. Maya brought and made her over to Ravana, knowing 
that the latter was going to become the lord of the demons. Delighted at having obtained 
such a good wife, Ravana next went and married his two brothers. On a three-peaked 
mountain called Trikuta in the middle of the ocean there stood a very large fortress built 
by Brahma himself. The demon Maya (who was a great architect) renovated it. It 
contained numberless palaces of gold and jewels, and was more beautiful and charming 
than Bhogavati (the capital of Patala, the nethermost region in the core of the globe), the 
city of the serpents, and Amaravati, the capital of Indra (the lord of paradise). It was 
known throughout the world by the name of Lanka. (1 — 4) 

The ocean surrounded it on all sides as a very deep moat. It had a 
strong fortification wall built of gold and jewels, the architectural beauty of which 
defied description. Whoever was preordained by Sri Hari to be the chief of the 
demons in a particular cycle, that illustrious hero of incomparable might live there 
with his army. (178 A-B) 

BALA-KANDA 


195 

Great demon warriors had been living there. They were all exterminated in battle 
by the gods. Now under Indra’s commission it was occupied by a garrison consisting 
of ten million guards of Kubera (the chief of the Yaksas). Having obtained this news 
from some quarter Ravana marshalled his army and besieged the fortress. Seeing his 
vast force of fierce warriors, the Yaksas fled for their lives. Thereupon Ravana 
surveyed the whole city; he was much pleased with what he saw and all his anxiety 
(about a suitable capital) was gone. Perceiving that the city was naturally beautiful and 
inaccessible for others, Ravana fixed his capital there. By assigning quarters to his 
followers according to their several deserts he made them all happy. On one occasion 
he led an expedition against Kubera and carried away his aerial car known by the 
name of Puspaka as a trophy. (1 — 4) 

Again, in a sportive mood he went and lifted Mount Kailasa and, thereby testing 
as it were, the might of his arms, returned most jubilant. (179) 

His happiness and prosperity, the number of his sons, his army and his allies, his 
victories and glory, his might, wisdom and fame grew from more to more everyday even 
as avarice grows with each new gain. He had a stalwart brother like Kumbhakarna, a 
rival to whom was never born in this world. Drinking his fill he remained buried in sleep 
for six months; and at his waking the three worlds trembled. Were he to take his meals 
everyday, the whole universe would soon have been ruined. He was unspeakably 




196 


staunch in fight and there were numberless brave warriors who could be compared with 
him. Ravana’s eldest son was Meghanada, who ranked foremost among the champions 
of the world. Before him none could stand in battle. Due to him there was a stampede 
in the city of the immortals everyday. (1 — 4) 

There were many more champions such as the hideous Kumukha, the intrepid 
Akampana, Kulisarada with teeth like thunderbolts, the fiery Dhumaketu and the gigantic 
Atikaya, each one of whom was able to subdue the whole world. (180) 

Taking form at will, they were skilled in all forms of demoniac Maya (deceit); they 
never thought of piety or compassion even in dream. One day the ten-headed Ravana 
was seated in court and reviewed his innumerable retainers, hosts of sons and 
grandsons, relatives and servants, troops of demons, more than anyone could count. On 
seeing the host the naturally proud Ravana spoke words full of wrath and 
arrogance: “Listen, all demon troops: the host of heaven are my enemies. They never 
dare to stand up in open fight, but flee away at the sight of a powerful adversary. There 
is only one way of causing their death, which I tell you in detail; now listen to it. Go 
and prevent the feasting of Brahmanas, the performance of sacrifices, the pouring of 
oblations into the sacred fire, the ceremony of Sraddha (offering food etc., to a departed 
soul) and all other religious functions. (1 — 4) 





BALA-KANDA 


197 

“Emaciated with starvation and rendered weak, the gods will automatically surrender 
to me. Then I will see whether I should kill them or let them go after subjecting them 
perfectly to my will.” (181) 
Then Ravana sent for Meghanada and admonished him, inciting him to greater 
strength and hostility.“The gods who are staunch in battle, powerful and proud of their 
fighting skill, you should conquer in battle and bring them in chains.” The son got up and 
bowed to the commands of his father. In this way Ravana ordered all and himself sallied 
forth, club in hand. Even as the ten-headed Ravana marched, the earth shook and at 
his thundering call the spouses of gods miscarried. Hearing of Ravana’s angry approach 
the gods themselves sought the caves of Mount Sumeru. When the ten-faced Ravana 
invaded the beautiful realms of the guardians of the ten quarters, he found them all 
desolate. Again and again he roared loudly like a lion and, challenging the gods to 
battle, scoffed at them. Mad after war he traversed the whole world in search of a 




198 



combatant; but nowhere could he find anyone. The sun-god, the moon-god, the wind-god, 
the god of water, the gods of wealth and fire, the gods of time and death and all other 
gods entrusted with the governance of the world. Kinnaras, Siddhas, men, gods and 
Nagas, all were wilfully harassed by him. All embodied beings in the creation of Brahma, 
whether men or women, submitted to Ravana’s will. All did his bidding out of fear and 
always bowed suppliantly at his feet. (1 — 7) 

By his mighty arm he subdued the whole universe and left no one independent. 
The king of kings, Ravana, ruled according to his own will. He won by the might of his 
arms and wedded daughters of gods, Yaksas, Gandharvas, human beings, Kinnaras 
and Nagas and many other beautiful and excellent dames. (182 A-B) 

Chapter 36
Whatever Ravana told Indrajit to do was done by him sooner as it were than the 
former uttered the command. Now hear what they did who had been ordered by him even 
earlier. The whole demon crew, sinful at heart and of terrible aspect, were the torment 
of heaven. Roaming at night, they did outrages of various kinds and assumed diverse 
forms through their delusive power. They acted in everyway contrary to Veda and did 




BALA-KANDA 


199 

everything in their power to eradicate religion. Wherever they found a cow or a Brahmana 
they set fire to that city, town or village. Virtuous acts were nowhere to be seen. No one 
paid any respect to the gods, the Brahmanas and the spiritual preceptor. There was no 
devotion to Sri Hari, no sacrificial performances, no austerities and no spiritual wisdom. 
No one would ever dream of listening to the Vedas or the Puranas. (1 — 4) 
If ever any talk of Japa (muttering of sacred formulas), Yoga (subjugation of mind), 
dispassion, penance or of oblations to gods in a sacrifice entered Ravana’s ears he 
would at once be on his feet and run to stop them. He would allow nothing of these and 
would destroy everything he laid his hands upon. There was such corruption in the world 
that no talk of piety could be heard anywhere. Whoever recited the Vedas or the Puranas 
was intimidated in manifold ways and sent into exile. 

The terrible outrages the demons did beggar description. There is no limit to the 
evil-doings of those who hold violence most dear to their heart. (183) 

200 

The number of villains, thieves and gamblers and of those who coveted others’ 
wealth and wives swelled to a great extent. People honoured not their parents and gods 
and exacted service from pious souls. Those who act in this way, Bhavanl, know all 
such creatures as demons. Perceiving the supreme disrespect for religion Earth was 
extremely distressed and perturbed. “The weight of mountains, rivers and oceans,” she 
said to herself, “is not so oppressive to me as of him who is malevolent to others.” She 
saw all goodness perverted; yet for fear of Ravana she could not utter a word. After great 
deliberation she took the form of a cow and went to the spot where all gods and sages 
were in hiding. With tears in her eyes she told them her sufferings; but none of them 
could be of any help to her. (1 — 4) 
The gods, sages and Gandharvas (celestial songsters), all repaired to Brahma’s 
abode; with them was poor Earth in the form of a cow grievously stricken with fear and 
grief. Brahma came to know everything; and realizing in his heart of heart his inability to 
help her, he said, “The immortal Lord whose servant you are will be my help as well as 
yours.” 

“Have patience, Earth,” said Brahma, “and fix your mind on the feet of Sri Hari. 
The Lord knows the distress of His servants and will put an end to your terrible 
suffering.” (184) 




BALA-KANDA 


201 
All the gods sat in counsel: “Where can we find the Lord, so that we may appeal 
to Him?” Someone suggested that they should go to Vaikuntha. Another said, “The Lord 
has His abode in the ocean of milk.” The Lord always manifests Himself in response to 
the devotion and love one cherishes in one’s heart. Girija, I too happened to be in that 
assembly and took occasion to put in a word: “For aught I know Sri Hari is present 
everywhere alike and is revealed only by love. Tell Me any place, time or quarter of the 
heaven where the Lord is not. Having taken the form of all creation, both animate and 
inanimate, He is yet destitute of everything and passionless; He is revealed by love even 
as fire is manifested by friction.” “My words found favour with all and Brahma applauded 
me saying, “Well said, well said!” (1 — 4) 

Brahma was glad at heart to hear My words the hair on his body bristled and tears 
flowed from his eyes. Recovering himself, the stable-minded Brahma joined his palms 
and prayed: — (185) 

Chapter 37

202 

Glory, all glory to You, O Lord of immortals. O delight of the devotees, O protector 
of the suppliant, O benefactor of cows and the Brahmanas, O slayer of demons, O beloved 
consort of Laksmi (daughter of the ocean), glory to You. O guardian of gods and the earth, 
mysterious are Thy ways: their secret is known to none. Let Him who is benevolent by 
nature and compassionate to the humble show His grace. Glory, all glory to the immortal 
Lord Mukunda (the bestower of salvation and love), who resides in all hearts, is supreme 
bliss personified, who is omnipresent, unknowable, and supersensuous, whose acts are 
holy and who is beyond the veil of Maya (illusion). Glory to Him who is T ruth, Consciousness 
and Bliss combined, who is most lovingly meditated upon day and night and whose praises 
are sung by multitudes of sages who are full of dispassion and entirely free from infatuation. 
Let the Slayer of the sinful Agha, bestow His care on us — He who brought forth the 




BALA-KANDA 


203 

threefold creation (viz., that which is dominated by Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, viz., gods, 
men and demons) without anyone else to assist Him; we know neither devotion nor 
worship. He who disperses the fear of transmigration, delights the mind of sages and puts 
an end to hosts of calamities, we gods betake ourselves to Him in thought, word and deed, 
giving up our wonted cleverness. The Lord, who is known neither to Sarada (the goddess 
of learning), nor to the Vedas, nor again to Sesa (the serpent-god), nor to any of the sages, 
who as the Vedas proclaim loves the lowly, let Him be moved to pity. The sages, Siddhas 
(a class of celestials naturally endowed with supernatural powers) and all gods, grievously 
stricken with fear, bow at the lotus feet of the Lord who serves as Mount Mandara for churning 
the ocean of worldly existence, who is charming in everyway, who is an abode of virtues and 
an embodiment of bliss. (1 — 4) 

Knowing that the gods and Earth were terror-stricken and hearing their loving 
entreaties, a deep voice came from heaven, which removed all their doubt and 
anxiety: (186) 

‘Fear not, O sages, Siddhas and Indra (the chief of gods); for your sake I will 
assume the form of a human being. In the glorious solar race I shall be born as a human 
being alongwith My part manifestations. The sage Kasyapa and his wife Aditi did severe 
penance; to them I have already vouchsafed a boon. They have appeared in the city of 




204 


Ayodhya as rulers of men in the form of Dasaratha and Kausalya. In their house I shall 
take birth in the form of four brothers, the ornament of Raghu’s line. I shall implement 
all that was uttered by Narada and shall descend with My Supreme Energy. In this way 
I shall relieve the earth of all its burden; be fearless, O gods.” As the divine voice from heaven 
reached the god’s ears they returned forthwith with their heart soothed.Then Brahma 
admonished Earth, who was rid of all fear and felt reassured in her heart. (1 — 5) 

Then Brahma proceeded to his realm after thus instructing the gods: “Assuming 
the form of monkeys you go to the earth and adore the feet of Sri Hari.” (187) 

Chapter 38

All the gods went to their several abodes alongwith Earth; they all felt relieved 
in their heart. And the gods were delighted to receive the orders that Brahma gave, 
and lost no time in carrying them out. They took the form of monkeys on earth; their 
might and glory were incomparable. They were all brave and had mountains, trees and 
nails for their weapons. Resolute of mind, they awaited the advent of Sri Hari, 
swarming on mountains and in woods wherever they liked and dividing themselves into 
gallant troops of their own. I have related to you all this interesting account; now hear 
that which was interrupted before. In the city of Ayodhya there ruled a king who was 
a jewel of Raghu’s race; he was called Dasaratha, a name which is familiar in the 
Vedas. He was a champion of virtue, a repository of good qualities and a man of 
wisdom; he was a sincere devotee of God Visnu (the wielder of the Sarriga bow) and 
his mind was also set on Him. (1 — 4) 




BALA-KANDA 


205 
Kausalya and his other beloved consorts were all of holy life; humble and devoted 
to their lord, they had a strong attachment to the lotus feet of Sri Hari. (188) 

One day the king was sad at heart that he had no son. He hastened to his 
preceptor’s residence and, falling at his feet, made many entreaties. He told the Guru all 
his joys and sorrows; the sage Vasistha comforted him in many ways and said, “Take 
heart and wait; you will have four sons, who will be known throughout the three worlds 
and will rid the devotees of their fears.” Then Vasistha invited the sage Srhgi and had 
a noble sacrifice performed by him for the birth of a son to the king. When the sage 
devoutly offered oblations into the sacred fire, the fire-god appeared with an offering of 
rice boiled with milk in his hand. Said the fire-god, “Whatever Vasistha has contemplated 
for you, that object is fully accomplished. Take this oblation, O king, and divide it in such 
proportions as you think fit.” (1 — 4) 

The fire-god then disappeared after telling the whole assembly of what was to 
be done. The king was transported with ecstasy and could not contain himself 
for joy. (189) 

Chapter 39
206 

The king at once sent for his beloved consorts. When Kausalya and the other 
queens arrived there, he gave one half of the offering to Kausalya and divided the other 
into two halves, one of which he gave to Kaikeyi. The remnant was again divided into 
two parts, which he placed in the hands of Kausalya and kaikeyi and after thus obtaining 
their approval handed both the shares to Sumitra. In this way all the queens became 
pregnant. They were all glad of heart and felt very happy. From the time Sri Hari found 
His way into the womb joy and prosperity reigned in all the worlds. In the palace shone 
the queens, who were all mines of beauty, virtue and glory. Some time was thus happily 
spent, till the time arrived for the Lord to be revealed. (1 — 4) 

The position of the sun and the moon, the zodiacal sign into which the sun had 
entered, the position of the seven other planets, the day of the week as well as the day 
of the lunar month, yoga, lagna, planet, Day,Luner Day (Tithi) all these turned out to be 
propitious. And full of delight was all creation, animate and inanimate; for the birth of Sri 
Rama is the source of joy. (190) 

BALA-KANDA 


207 

It was the ninth day of the bright half of the sacred month of Caitra; the moon 
had entered the asterism named Abhijit, which is so dear to Sri Hari. The sun was 
at its meridian; the day was neither cold nor hot. It was a holy time which gave rest 
to the whole world. A cool, soft and fragrant breeze was blowing. The gods were feeling 
exhilarated and the saints were bubbling with enthusiasm. The woods were full of 
blossoms, the mountains were resplendent with gems and every river flowed a stream 
of nectar. When Brahma perceived that the time of Sri Rama’s birth had approached, 
all the gods came out with their aerial cars duly equipped. The bright heaven was 
crowded with their hosts and troops of Gandharvas chanted praises and rained down 
flowers placing them in their beautiful palms. The sky resounded with the beat of 
kettedrums. Nagas, sages and gods offered praises and tendered their services in 
manifold ways. (1 — 4) 

Having offered their praises the gods returned to their several abodes, when the 
Lord, and abode of the universe and the solace of all creation, manifested Himself. (191) 




208 

The gracious Lord, who is compassionate to the lowly and the benefactor of 
Kausalya appeared. The thought of His marvellous form, which stole the heart of 
sages, filled the mother with joy. His body was dark as a cloud, the delight of all eyes; 
in His four arms He bore His characteristic emblems (a conch-shell, a discus, a club and 
a lotus). Adorned with jewels and a garland of sylvan flowers and endowed with 
large eyes, the Slayer of the demon Khara was an ocean of beauty. Joining both her 
palms the mother said, “O infinite Lord, how can I praise You! The Vedas as well as the 
Puranas declare You as transcending Maya, Guna (made of prakrti) and beyond 
all measure. He who is sung by the Vedas and holy men as an ocean of mercy and bliss 
and the repository of all virtues, the same Lord of Laksmi, the lover of His devotees, 
has revealed Himself for my good. The Vedas proclaim that every pore of Your body 
contains multitudes of universes brought forth by Maya. That such a Lord stayed in my 
womb — this amusing story staggers the mind of even men of wisdom.” When the revelation 
came upon the mother, the Lord smiled; He would perform many a sportive act. Therefore 
He exhorted her by telling her the charming account of her previous birth so that she 
might love Him as her own child. The mother’s mind was changed; she spoke again, 

BALA-KANDA 

209 
“Give up this superhuman form and indulge in childish sports, which are so dear to a 
mother’s heart; the joy that comes from such sports is unequalled in everyway.” Hearing 
these words the all-wise Lord of immortals became an infant and began to cry. Those who 
sing this lay (says Tulasidasa) attain to the abode of Sri Hari and never fall into the well 
of mundane existence. (1 — 4) 

For the sake of Brahmanas, cows, gods and saints, the Lord, who transcends 
Maya and is beyond the three modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) as well as 
beyond the reach of the senses took birth as a man assuming a form which is a product 
of His own will. (192) 
On hearing the most pleasing sound of the baby's cries all the queens came in a 
flurry. Maid-servants ran helter-skelter in great delight; all the people of the city were 
transported with joy. When the tidings of the birth of a son reached Dasaratha's ears he 
was drowned as it were in the ecstasy of absorption into Brahma. With a mind saturated 
with the highest love and with a body thrilling all over with joy he sought to rise, while 
attempting to recover his senses. "The same Lord, whose very Name brings blessings 
with It even when It reaches one's ears, has arrived at my house," he said to himself; 
and the thought filled his mind with supreme joy. Sending for musicians he said, 
"Play on your instruments. "The preceptor Vasistha was also invited and he called at the 
palace door, with a train of Brahmanas. They all went and gazed upon the peerless babe, 
who was an embodiment of beauty and possessed excellences more than one could tell. 

(1-4) 




210 

After performing the Nandimukha Sraddha* the king completed all the jatakarmar 
ites connected with the birth of a child and made gifts of gold, cows, raiment and jewels 
to the Brahmanas. (193) 
The city was full of flags and banners and festal arches. It was decorated in a way 
which defie description. Showers of flowers dropped from heaven; everybody was rapt in 
the joy of absorption into Brahma. Women streamed forth in troops; they came running 
in their natural toilet. Carrying jars of gold and salvers full of auspicious articles, they 
entered the portals of the royal palace singing as they went along. Waving lights and 
passing offerings round and round over the child's head as an act of exorcism they threw 
themselves at the babe's feet again and again. Bards, minstrels, panegyrists and 
songsters chanted solemn praises of the Lord of Raghus. Everyone gave whatever one 
possessed; even he who received did not retain it. All the lanes of the city were muddy 
with pastes of musk, sandal and saffron. (1 — 4) 

* A commemorative offering to the Manes Preliminary to any joyous occasion, such as investiture with 
the sacred thread, wedding etc. 




BALA-KANDA 


211 


There was happy music of festivity in every house; for the very fountain of 
beauty had manifested Himself. All the men and women of the city were full of joy 
everywhere. (194) 

Kaikeyi and Sumitra each gave birth to lovely boys. The joy, grandeur, solemnity 
of the occasion and the concourse of men were more than what Sarada and the serpent- 
king could describe. The city of Ayodhya wore a galla appearance; it looked as if Night 
had come to see the Lord and, feeling abashed as it were at the sight of the sun (her 
own lord), had deliberately stayed over in the form of twilight. Clouds of incense 
represented the dusk; and handfuls of red powder tossed up and wafted in the air 
represented the redish light of sunset. The hosts of jewels that gleamed on house tops 
looked like so many stars; while the round pinnacle on the top of the royal palace 
corresponded to the beautiful moon. The sound of the chanting of Veda in the palace 
resembled the chirping of birds appropriate to the occasion. Gazing upon this spectacle 
the sun forgot himself; a whole month passed without his knowing it. (1 — 4) 

The day assumed the length of a month; but no one could understand the mystery. 
The sun stood motionless with his chariot; how could there be any night? (195) 



212 

Nobody noticed this strange phenomenon; the sun at last moved ahead singing 
the praises of Sri Rama as he went. Witnessing the great festival the gods, sages and 
Nagas proceeded to their several abodes congratulating themselves on their good luck. 
I tell you one more covert act of Mine; listen to it, O Girija, for I know your steadfast faith. 
The sage Kakabhusundi and Myself both were there together in human form without 
anyone knowing it. Elated with supreme joy and the delight of love we roamed about the 
streets in ecstasy forgetting ourselves. He alone who enjoyed Sri Rama's grace could 
be apprised of this blessed adventure of ours. On that occasion the king granted the 
desire of everyone's heart, in whatever manner one came. He bestowed elephants, 
chariots, horses, gold, cows, diamonds and costumes of various kinds. (1 — 4) 

All were satisfied in their heart and invoked blessings here and there, saying, “May 
all the sons of Dasaratha live long those Lord of Tulasidasa.” (196) 
BALA-KANDA 

213 

A few days rolled on in this way; days and nights passed unnoticed. Knowing that 
the time had come for naming the children, the king sent for the enlightened sage 
Vasistha. After paying him homage the king spoke to him thus, "Holy sir! Kindly assign 
them names that you have fixed your mind upon." "Their names are many and unique; 
yet O king, I will declare them according to my own lights. This eldest boy of yours, who 
is an ocean of felicity and embodiment of joy, a particle of which fills the three worlds with 
delight, has for His name 'Rama 1 , the very home of bliss and the comforter of all the 
worlds. Your second son, who sustains and supports the universe, will be called 
'Bharata 1 ; while he whose very thought destroys one's enemies is celebrated in the 
Vedas by the name of Satrughna'." (1 — 4) 

He who is the abode of noble characteristics, the beloved of Sri Rama and the 
mainstay of the whole universe, was given by Guru Vasistha the splendid name of 
Laksmana. (197) 

The preceptor assigned these names after careful thought and then said, "Your 


214 


four sons, O king, are the essence of Veda itself. Of them Sri Rama is the sages' treasure, 
the devotee's all in all and Siva's very life; He takes delight at present in the rapture of 
childish sports”. From his earliest days Laksmana came to look upon Sri Rama as his 
benefactor and master and conceived devotion to His feet. The love that existed between 
the two half-brothers, Bharata and Satrughna, was as glorious as that which obtains 
between a master and his servant. As the mothers gazed on the beauty of the two lovely 
pairs, one of whom was dark, the other fair, they would break a blade of grass in order 
to avert the evil eye. Although all the four brothers were embodiments of amiability, beauty 
and goodness, yet Sri Rama was an ocean of bliss par excellence. In His heart shone 
the moon of grace and His captivating smile represented its rays. Now on her lap and 
now in the beautiful cradle, the mother fondled Him calling Him her own darling. (1 — 4) 

The unborn and all-pervading Brahma, who is untainted by Maya, without attributes 
and devoid of play, has sought shelter in the arms of Kausalya conquered by her love 
and devotion. (198) 

BALA-KANDA 


215 
His dark form, which resembles a blue lotus and a heavy rain-cloud, possessed the 
beauty of millions of Cupids. The nails glistened on His red lotus-like feet as if pearls had 
been set on the petals of a rosy lotus. Marks of a thunderbolt, a flag and a goad shone 
on His soles and the tinkling of His anklets enraptured the heart of sages. A string of tiny 
bells girdled His waist and there were threefolds in His belly; the depth of His navel is 
known to him alone who has perceived it. His long arms were adorned with a number 
of ornaments and the tiger's claw hanging on His breast possessed an exquisite beauty. 
The elegance of the necklace of gems with a diamond at the lowest end and the print 
of the Brahmana's foot* fascinated one's mind. His neck resembled a conch-shell in its 
spiral shape and the chin looked most beautiful; while His face flushed with the beauty 
of countless Cupids. Pairs of small teeth were veiled by rosy lips and His beautiful nose 
and the sectarian mark on His brow defied description. With charming ears and most 
lovely cheeks, His sweet lisping prattle was most delightful to hear. The smooth and curly 
hair that had never been trimmed since His very birth had been beautifully dressed in 
manifold ways by the mother. A yellow frock covered His body and His crawling on knees 
and hands was most pleasing to me. The elegance of His form was something which even 
the Vedas and Sesa (the serpent-god) could not describe; it is known to him alone who 
has beheld it even in a dream. (1 — 6) 

The all-blissful Lord, who is above delusion and transcends knowledge, speech 
and all sensuous perception, sported like an innocent child, yielding to the supreme love 
of the royal couple (Dasaratha and Kausalya). (199) 

* Once upon a time there was a discussion among the sages as to which of the three Lords of creation, viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva was the greatest. In order to put the matter to the test Brahma’s son Bhrgu was deputed to visit the three divinities one by one. Bhrgu first approached his own father and did not bow to him as a dutiful son. This enraged Brahma; but he somehow managed to curb his anger by force of reason. From Brahma’s court the sage went to Kailasa. The god of gods, Sankara, rose to greet the sage and stretched His arms to embrace him. But Bhrgu avoided His touch saying, “Touch me not, since you have broken social conventions and flouted the injunctions of the Vedas.” Siva lost His temper when He heard these aspersions. Taking up His trident He proceeded to strike the sage; but Goddess ParvatT intervened and pacified Him. Thereafter Bhrgu went to Vaikuntha, the abode of Bhagavan Visnu, and found the Lord reposing with His head on the lap of Sri LaksmT. Breaking into His room unceremoniously the sage suddenly kicked Him on the chest. The almighty Lord quickly rose with SrT LaksmT, alighted from His bed and, offering him homage, asked his forgiveness for the incivility shown to him by not welcoming him in advance. The Lord then rubbed the sage’s foot saying that it might have been hurt by striking against His hard breast. Since then the Lord has ever borne on His bosom the print of the sage’s foot as a mark of honour and it stands an abiding monument to His unequalled forbearance. 




216 



In this way Sri Rama, the father and mother of the universe, delighted the people 
of Ayodhya. Bhavani, this demonstrates how those who have conceived devotion to the 
feet of the Lord of Raghus are repaid by Him. On the other hand, no one can liberate 
from the bondage of worldly existence him who is averse to the Lord of Raghus, however 
much he may struggle. Even that Maya which has held under her sway all living beings, 
both animate and inanimate, trembles before the Lord, who makes her dance to the play 
of His eye-brows. Leaving such a lord, tell me, whom should we adore? The Lord of 
Raghus will shawer those who betake themselves to Him in thought, word and deed, 
giving up all gnilenes. In this way the Lord sported as a child, to the delight of all the 
people of the city. The mother would now dandle Him in her arms, and now put Him down 
in the cradle and rock Him. (1 — 4) 

Kausalya remained so rapt in love that days and nights passed unnoticed. Out of 
affection for her boy she would sing lays of His childhood. (200) 


BALA-KANDA 


217 



One day, mother Kausalya washed and adorned her boy and put Him to sleep in 
the cradle. Thereafter she bathed herself in order to worship the patron deity of her 
family. Having worshipped the deity she offered Him food and then returned to the 
kitchen. When she came back to the place of worship, she beheld her boy eating the 
food that had been offered to the Lord. Frightened at this, the mother went to her boy and 
found Him asleep in the nursery. Coming back once more to the temple she still saw the 
boy there. She now trembled with fear and her mind found no rest. She saw two boys, 
one in the temple and the other in the nursery. She said to herself, "Is it my mental illusion 
or some other unusual phenomenon?" When Sri Rama saw His mother perplexed, the 
Lord gently smiled. (1 — 4) 

The Lord then revealed to His mother His marvellous infinite form, every pore of 
whose skin contained millions of universes. (201) 


218 




She saw therein countless suns and moons, Sivas and four-faced Brahmas, and 
a number of mountains, rivers, oceans, plains and woods, as well as the spirit of time, 
the principle of action, the modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), the spirit of 
knowledge and Nature and many more things of which she had never heard before. She 
further perceived Maya, who is powerful in every respect, stricken with terror and 
standing with her palms joined together. The mother also beheld the embodied soul, who 
is made to dance by Maya, and even so the spirit of devotion, which liberates the soul. 
The hair on the mother's body bristled and she stood speechless. Closing her eyes she 
bowed her head at the Lord's feet. Seeing the mother struck with wonder the Slayer of 
Khara assumed the form of a child again. She was unable to utter praises and trembled 
at the thought that she had looked upon the Father of the universe as her own child. Sri 
Hari comforted His mother in many ways and said, "Listen, My mother: do not reveal this 
fact anywhere." (1 — 4) 
aba jani kabahu byapai prabhu mohi maya tori. 202. 

Joining her palms Kausalya prayed 
Maya no longer casts her spell on me." 

again and again, "See, my Lord, that Your 
wife 

Sri Hari indulged in many kinds of childish sports to the great delight of His 
votaries. After some time all the four brothers passed the stage of infancy, gladdening the 
inmates of the house. The preceptor then came and performed the ceremony of tonsure; 


*BALA-KANDA* 219 

and the Brahmanas received handsome presents for officiating at the same. All the four 
noble princes moved about indulging in numerous plays, which were most delightful to 
look at. The Lord, who cannot be comprehended through mind, speech or action, sported 
in the courtyard of Dasaratha. When the king, while at meals, called Him, He would not 
turn up, loth as he was to leave the company of His playmates. When Kausalya went to 
call Him, the Lord would run away toddling. He whom the Vedas declare in negative terms 
and whose end even Siva could not find, the mother ran to catch Him by force. With His 
body besmirched all over with dust, He came and the king smilingly took Him in his arms. 
(1-5) 

Even while the Lord sat at meals, His mind was restless, so that the moment He 
got a chance He would run away hither and thither with a scream of delight, His mouth 
daubed with curds and rice. (203) 

Chapter 40

His charming and most innocent childish sports have been sung by Sarada, Sesa, 
Sambhu and the Vedas. Those whose mind does not take delight in these, have been 
deprived by Providence of a great good fortune. When all the four brothers attained of 
boyhood, the preceptor as well as their parents invested them with the sacred thread. The 
Lord of Raghus then proceeded to His preceptor's residence for study and in a short time 
mastered all the branches of knowledge. What a great fun that Sri Hari, whose natural 
breath stands crystallized in the form of the four Vedas, should go to school. Proficient 
in learning and perfect in politeness, virtues and decorum, they played all the games 
imitating the role of a king. With an arrow and bow in the hands of each they appeared 




220 



most charming; their beauty enraptured the whole creation, both animate and inanimate. 
Through whichever street the four brothers passed in pursuit of their sport, all the men 
and women there stood motionless on perceiving them. (1 — 4) 

The people of Ayodhya, men and women, elderly men as well as children, all held 
the gracious Rama dearer than life. (204) 

Calling his half-brothers and playmates Sri Rama would take them with Him and 
go out to the forest for hunting everyday. He would deliberately kill only holy game and 
brought and showed the daily bag to the king. The beasts that were killed by Sri Rama's 
shaft went straight to heaven after death. He took His meals with His younger brothers 
and companions and obeyed the orders of His parents. He would always contrive means 
to delight the people of the city. He would listen to the Vedas and Puranas with rapt 
attention and would Himself expound the truths contained therein to His younger 
brothers. Rising at break of day the Lord of Raghus would bow His head to His parents 
and preceptor and, obtaining their permission, busied Himself with the affairs of the city. 
The king was glad at heart to see His noble acts. (1 — 4) 


The Lord, who is all-pervading, indivisible, desireless, unbegotten, attributeless 




BALA-KANDA 


221 


and without name or form, performed marvellous acts of various kinds for the sake of His 
devotees. (205) 

All this story has been sung by me; now hear attentively what followed. The great 
enlightened hermit Visvamitra lived in a forest knowing it to be a sacred spot. There he 
practised Japa (muttering of sacred formulas) and Yoga (contemplation) and performed 
sacrifices; but he was much afraid of the demons Marlca and Subahu. For as soon as 
they saw a sacrifice they would hasten to desecrate it to the great chagrin of the sage, 
who felt disturbed in his mind and thought that the wicked Raksasas could not be 
disposed of without Sri Hari. The great sage then said to himself, “The Lord has already 
taken birth in order to relieve the earth of its burden. Let me make the outrage of the 
demons an excuse of seeing His feet and after due entreaty bring the two brothers here. 
I will regale my eyes with the sight of Him who is the abode of knowledge, dispassion 
and all virtues." (1 — 4) 

Indulging in expectation of various kinds the sage took no time in reaching his 
destination. Bathing in the stream of the Sarayu he went to the royal court. (206) 

222 

Chapter 41
When the king heard of the sage's visit he went out to meet him with a party of 
Brahmanas. Prostrating himself on the ground the king reverently brought him in and 
seated him on his own throne. Then, washing the sage's feet, he paid him great honours 
and said, "No one else is so blessed as I am today." The king next entertained him with 
various kinds of food and the great sage was much delighted at heart. He then placed 
his four sons on the latter's feet. At the sight of Sri Rama the sage forgot all about 
himself. He was enraptured as he gazed on the beauty of Sri Rama's countenance even 
as the Cakora bird is enamoured of the full moon. Gladdened at heart, the king then 
addressed the following words to him, "Reverend sir, you have never shown such grace 
to me before. Tell me what brings you here; I will carry out your order without delay." 
"Hosts of demons molest me, O king; I have therefore come to ask something of you. 
Let me have the Lord of Raghus, Sri Rama, with His younger brother (Laksmana); with 
the extermination of the demons I will feel secure.” (1 — 5) 

“Entrust them to me, O king, with a cheerful heart; let no infatuation or ignorance 
stand in your way. You will earn religious merit and fair renown thereby, and your sons 
will be highly blessed." (207) 

BALA-KANDA 
223 
Hearing this most unwelcome demand the king's heart quivered and the brightness 
of his countenance faded. He said, "I have been blessed with these four sons in my old 
age. You have, therefore, made your demand without due consideration, holy sir. Ask of 
me land, cattle, goods and treasure; I will gladly give all I have without delay. Nothing is 
dearer than one’s body and life; even these I would part within a second. All my sons are 
dear to me as life; but I cannot unasme we an away sroo Rama, my lord. My lovely boys, 
who are yet too young, are no match for the most hideous and relentless demons." The 
enlightened hermit Visvamitra felt delighted at heart to hear the king's reply, steeped as it 
was in the nectar of love. Then Vasistha pleaded with the king in manifold ways and all 
his doubts were gone. Most politely he sent for the two boys and pressing them to his bosom 
admonished them in many ways. Turning to the sage he then said, "My lord, the two boys 
are my very life. You are their only father now, holy sir; there is no one to look after them." 
(1-5) 

Invoking various blessings on the boys the king committed them to the care of the 
sage; then they called at the mother's apartment and bowing their head at her feet departed. 
The two heroes, lions among men, oceans of compassion, resolute of purpose and the 




224 


ultimate cause of the whole universe, gladly proceeded to rid the sage of his fear. (208A-B) 

Chapter 42

The Lord had reddish eyes, a broad chest and long arms; His body was dark as 
the blue lotus or the Tamala tree. With a beautiful quiver fastened at His back with a 
yellow piece of cloth wrapped round His waist, He held in His two hands a lovely bow 
and arrow respectively. In the two pretty boys, one of whom was dark and the other fair, 
Visvamitra secured a great treasure. "I have now realized," said he to himself, "that the 
Lord is a votary of the Brahmanas; on my account He has left His own father." While 
on the way the sage pointed out the demoness Tadaka, who on hearing their voice 
rushed up in a fury. With a single shaft the Lord took her life and recognizing her as 
deserving of compassion bestowed His own state on her. Then the seer Visvamitra, 
while recognizing his lord as the fountain of knowledge, imparted to Him a sacred formula 
which armed Him against hunger and thirst and endowed Him with unequalled strength 
of body and a glow of vigour. (1 — 4) 
Making over to Him every kind of weapon the sage took the Lord to his own 
hermitage and devoutly gave Him bulbs, roots and fruits to eat, perceiving in Him his 
greatest friend. (209) 




BALA-KANDA 


225 
Chapter 43

At daybreak the Lord of Raghus said to the sage, “You may now go and perform 
your sacrifice without any fear of molestation.” All the sages then started offering 
oblations into the sacred fire, while Sri Rama Himself guarded the sacrifice. On hearing 
of it the furious demon Marica, a great enemy of hermits, rushed with his army. Sri Rama 
struck him with a headless shaft and he fell at a distance of eight hundred miles beyond 
the sea-shore. The Lord next despatched Subahu with an arrow of fire; while His 
younger brother, Laksmana, exterminated the demon host. Having killed the demons in 
this way the Lord rid the Brahmanas of their fear; the whole company of gods and sages 
offered praises to Him. The Lord of Raghus stayed there a few days more and showed 
His grace to the Brahmanas. Even though the Lord knew everything, the Brahmanas out 
of their devotion repeated to Him many legends from the Puranas. The sage then politely 
said to Him in a pleading tone, “My lord, let us go and witness a performance.” Hearing 
of a bow-sacrifice, the Lord of Raghus gladly accompanied the noble sage. On the way 
they saw a hermitage without bird, beast or any other living creature. Observing a slab 
of stone lying there the Lord inquired of the sage about it, and the latter in reply told Him 
in detail the whole history behind it. (1 — 6) 


“Gautama’s consort, having assumed the form of a stone under a curse, 
seeks with patience the dust of Your lotus feet; show mercy to her, O Hero of 





BALA-KANDA 


227 


At the very touch of His holy feet, which drive away sorrow, emerged Ahalya, a true 
embodiment of austerity. Beholding the Lord of Raghus, the delight of His servants, she 
stood before Him with joined palms. Her heart being overwhelmed with love, the hair on 
her body stood on their end and she was unable to utter a word. The most blessed Ahalya 
cleaved to His feet and tears streamed from both her eyes. Recovering herself she 
recognized the Lord and by the grace of Sri Rama attained devotion to His feet. In a 
guileless speech she began to praise the Lord, “Glory to the Lord of Raghus, who is 
accessible through spiritual knowledge. I am an impure woman, while the Lord is able to 
sanctify the whole world and is the delight of His servants. O lotus-eyed enemy of 
Ravana, You rid Your devotees of the fear of rebirth; therefore, I have taken refuge in 
You. Pray save me, save me. My consort (Gautama) did well in pronouncing a curse on 
me, and I have deemed it the greatest favour. I have feasted my eyes on Sri Hari 
(Yourself), who liberated from the bondage of worldly existence. Lord Sankara deems 
Your sight as the only blessing worth the name. Lord, I am dull witted; I have only one 
request to make. I seek no other boon from You, my Master; I only crave that my mind 
may ever continue to enjoy the love of Your feet-dust even as a bee sucks the honey 
from a lotus. The merciful Lord Sri Hari placed on my head the same lotus feet from which 
issued the most holy Gariga (the heavenly river) — which is borne by Siva on His head — 
and which are adored by Brahma (the Creator).” Having thus praised Sri Hari and falling 
again and again at His feet Gautama’s consort (Ahalya) took leave of the Lord; and 
securing a boon, which she held most dear to her heart, she went to her husband’s abode 
full of joy. (1 — 4) 
The Lord Sri Hari is such a great friend of the humble and compassionate 
beyond one’s deserts. Adore Him, O foolish Tulasidasa, giving up all deceit and 
wily wrangling. (211) 

228 

Sri Rama and Laksmana accompanied the sage and reached the bank of the 
Gariga, the stream of which purifies the whole universe. The son of Gadhi, Visvamitra, 
related the whole legend how the celestial stream had come down upon earth. The Lord 
then performed His ablutions with all the sages, and the Brahmanas received gifts of 
various kinds. Accompanied by a troop of hermits the Lord gladly proceeded further and 
quickly drew near to the capital of the Videhas, Mithila. When Sri Rama beheld the 
beauty of the city, He as well as His younger brother were much delighted. There were 
many big and small wells, rivers and tanks with water as sweet as nectar and reached 
by flights of steps made of jewels. Bees, drunk with honey, made a sweet humming 
sound and birds of various hues softly cooed. Lotuses of different colours opened their 
petals; while a cool, soft and fragrant breeze ever delighted the soul. (1 — 4) 


The city was adorned on all sides with flower-gardens, orchards and groves, the 
haunt of innumerable birds, full of blossoms, fruits and charming leaves. (212) 
The beauty of the city surpassed description; every inch of it was soul-captivating. 




BALA-KANDA 


229 

There was a lovely bazar and gorgeous balconies made of jewels, fashioned as it were, 
by the Creator with his own hands. Wealthy and good merchants, who vied with Kubera 
(the god of wealth), sat with all their various goods. Beautiful crossings of roads and 
charming streets were constantly sprinkled with scented waters. The houses of all were 
abodes of bliss and contained beautiful wall-paintings portrayed, as it were, by Rati’s lord 
(Cupid) himself. The people of the city, both men and women, were good-looking, pious, 
saintly, virtuous, wise and accomplished. The palace of King Janaka was most marvellous, 
the sight of whose splendour astounded even gods. Even the fortification wall filled the 
mind with wonder; it seemed as if it had enclosed within its limits the beauty of the whole 
universe. (1 — 4) 

White palaces were screened here and there by bejewelled gold tapestries of 
various beautiful designs; while the exquisite palace where Sita lived was far too lovely 
for words to describe. (213) 

Chapter 44
The entrances to the palace were all beautiful and hard like thunder bolt (or made 
of diamond). They were always thronged with feudatory princes, dancers, panegyrists and 
bards. There were spacious stables and stalls for elephants, which were crowded at all 
times with steeds, elephants and chariots. The king had a number of brave ministers and 
generals. They all owned mansions that vied with the royal palace. In the outskirts of the 
city by the side of lakes and rivers numerous princes had encamped here and there. On 
seeing a fine mango-grove, which was comfortable and agreeable in everyway, the sage 




230 


Kausika (Visvamitra) said, “O wise hero of Raghu’s race, I like this orchard; let us 
stay here.” “Very well, my lord !” answered the gracious Lord, and encamped there with 
all the hermits’ train. When the king of Mithila got the news that the great sage Visvamitra 
had come. (1 — 4) 

He took with him his faithful ministers, a number of warriors, noble Brahmanas, his 
family preceptor (Satananda) and the chief of his kinsmen, and thus went forth rejoicing 
to meet the formost among sages. (214) 

Placing his head on the sage’s feet the king made obeisance to him; while the lord 
of the sages, Visvamitra, gladly gave him his blessing. The king then respectfully saluted 
the Brahmanas and congratulated himself on his good fortune (in being able to receive 
them). Inquiring again and again about his welfare, Visvamitra led the king to a seat. At that 
very time arrived the two half-brothers, who had gone to see the garden. One dark and the 
other fair, the two lads were yet tender of age. The delight of all eyes, they stole the heart 
of the whole world. All those present there rose when the Lord of Raghus came; and Visvamitra 
seated Him by his side. They were all delighted to see the two brothers: tears rushed to their 
eyes and the hair on their body bristled with joy. Beholding Sri Rama’s lovely and charming 
form, King Videha* (Janaka) was particularly beside himself with joy. (1 — 4) 

* There is a pun on the word ‘Videha’ in the original. The kings of Mithila enjoyed the hereditary title 
of ‘Videha’ because they ruled over the territory of Videha (Mithila). King Janaka was also a man of wisdom 
and had, therefore, no feeling of self-identification with the body. At the sight of Sri Rama, however, he was 
completely out of his body and therefore justified his name (Videha) in a special degree. 




BALA-KANDA 


231 

Finding his heart overwhelmed with love the king recovered himself by recourse 
to reason and, bowing his head at the sage’s feet, spoke the following pregnant words 
in a voice choked with emotion: — (215) 

Chapter 45
“Tell me, my lord: are these two pretty boys the ornament of a sage’s family or the 
proteetors of some royal dynasty? Or, is it that Brahma (the Absolute), whom the Vedas 
describe in negative terms such as ‘Not that’ (Neti), has appeared in a dual form? My 
mind, which is dispassion itself in its natural form, is enraptured at their sight even as the 
Cakora bird is transported with joy at the sight of the moon. Therefore, Sir, I earnestly 
inquire of you: tell me the truth, my Lord; hide nothing from me. Deeply attached to them 
at their very sight, my mind has perforce renounced the joy of absorption into Brahma.” 
The sage smilingly answered, “You have spoken well, O king; your words can never be 
untrue. Whatever living beings there are in this world, they all love these boys.” Sri Rama 
smiled within Himself on hearing these words. “They are the sons of King Dasaratha, the 
jewel of Raghu’s race; the king has sent them for my cause. (1 — 4) 
These two noble brothers, Rama and Laksmana, are the embodiments of beauty, 




232 

virtue and strength. The whole world knows that they conquered the demons in battle and 
protected my sacrifice from harm.” (216) 

“When I behold your feet, O sage, ’’added the king, “I cannot tell what a great merit 
I have earned in the past. These two brothers, one of whom is dark of hue and the other 
fair, are the delight of delight itself. Their guileless affection for each other is beyond 
description; it is so agreeable and soul-ravishing.” “Listen to me, my lord,” continued King 
Videha rejoicing, “they have natural affinity for each other like the one existing between 
Brahma (the Supreme Spirit) and Jiva (the individual soul).” The king gazed upon the 
Lord over and over again; the hair on his body stood on end and his heart overflowed 
with joy. Extolling the sage and bowing his head at the latter’s feet, the king escorted him 
to his capital, and lodged the sage in a beautiful palace which was comfortable at all 
times. Then, after further homage and rendering all kinds of service to him, the king took 
leave of the sage and returned to his own palace. (1 — 4) 

Having dined with the seers and rested awhile, Lord Sri Rama, the Jewel of 
Raghu’s race, sat down by His brother’s side, a quarter of the day still remained. (217) 




BALA-KANDA 


233 


Laksmana felt in his heart a great longing to go and see Janaka’s capital. He was, 
however, afraid of the Lord and stood in awe of the sage; therefore he did not openly 
declare it and smiled within himself. Sri Rama understood what was passing in His 
younger brother’s mind; and His heart overflowed with a kindly feeling for His devotee. 
Taking leave of His preceptor to speak, He smilingly spoke with much diffidence in most 
polite terms,” My lord, Laksmana longs to see the city, but out of fear and respect for 
you he does not make it known to you. If I have your permission, I will take him round 
the city and quickly bring him back.” Hearing this the chief of sages, Visvamitra, replied 
in affectionate terms, “It is no wonder, Rama, that You should respect good manners. 
You are the upholder of the moral code, my son, and bring joy to Your servants out of 
love for them. (1 — 4) 


“Go, blissful pair of brothers, and having seen the city come back. Bless the eyes 
of all by showing them your charming countenance.” (218) 




234 

Saluting the lotus-feet of the sage the two brothers, the delight of the eyes of the 
whole world, departed. Beholding the exquisite beauty of the two brothers troops of boys 
followed them, their eyes and mind being enamoured of it. Clad in yellow garments they 
had a quiver fastened at their back, with a cloth (of the same colour) wrapped round their 
waist; their hands were adorned with a graceful bow and arrow respectively. The 
beautiful pair, one of whom was dark and the other fair, had streaks of (red or white) 
sandalwood paste painted on their body so as to match the complexion. With a neck as 
well-built as the lion’s and long arms they had on their bosom an exquisite string of pearls 
obtained from the forehead of elephants. Their lovely eyes resembled the red lotus; and 
the moon-like face relieved the threefold agony. Their ears were adorned with pendants 
of gold, which stole as it were, the heart of those who looked on them. They cast a 
bewitching glance and had a pair of arched and shapely eyebrows; the lines of the 
sectarian mark on the forehead looked as if beauty had been sealed there. (1 — 4) 

Their beautiful head was covered with a charming rectangular cap and dark curly 
locks. The two brothers were lovely from head to foot; the beauty of every limb was as 
it should be. (219) 




BALA-KANDA 


235 


When the citizens received the news that the two princes had come to see the 
town, they all left their business and ran out of their homes as if paupers were out to grab 
a valuable property. Beholding the natural grace of two brothers, they were glad at heart 
and attained the consummation of their eyes. Sticking to the air-holes of their houses 
young ladies lovingly scanned Sri Rama’s beauty. They fondly spoke to one another in 
the following words: “O friend, He has surpassed in beauty millions of Cupids. Nowhere 
among gods, men, demons, Nagas or sages do we hear of such beauty. God Visnu is 
endowed with four arms, Brahma has four face, while Siva, the Slayer of Tripura, has 
a frightful garb and five faces. O friend, there is no other god who could stand 
comparison with this beauty. (1 — 4) 

“The two lads, one dark and the other fair, are yet of tender age and are 
repositories of beauty and abodes of bliss. Millions and hundreds of millions of Cupids 
are worth sacrificing to each one of their limbs.” (220) 
“Tell me, friend, what embodied being is there that would not be charmed to see 
such beauty?” One of them lovingly said in gentle tones, “Hear, my dear, what I have 
been told. These two lads, a beautiful pair of cygnets as it were, are sons of King Dasaratha; 
they are the protectors of Kausika’s sacrifice, and have slain demons in the field of battle. 
He who has a swarthy form and has charming lotus-like eyes and who has quelled the 
pride of Marlca and Subahu, wielding a bow and shaft in His hands, is Kausalya’s son, 
Rama by name, the very fountain of bliss. The fair youth in gallant attire, who is closely 
following Sri Rama, a bow and arrow in hand, is the latter’s younger brother and is named 
Laksmana. Sumitra, friend, is his mother, you must know. (1 — 4) 




236 



“Having accomplished the object of the Brahmana, Visvamitra, and redeeming the 
sage’s wife, Ahalya, on the way, the two brothers have come here to witness the bow- 
sacrifice.” All the ladies were delighted to hear this. (221) 

Beholding Sri Rama’s beauty someone said, “Here is a bridegroom worthy of 
Princess Janaki. If the king does but see him, friend, I am sure he will abandon his vow 
and insist upon their marriage.” Said another, “The king has come to know them and has 
received them as well as the sage with all honour. But the king, my dear, refuses to give 
up his vow and, as Fate would have it, persists in his folly.” Yet another said,” If 
providence is good and, as we are told, gives every man his due, then Janaki is sure 
to have him as her bridegroom. About this, my dear, there can be no doubt. If such a 
union is brought about by Providence, everyone will have realized one’s object. My 
impatience, friend, is augmented by the thought that this alliance will impel him to visit this 
place again. (1 — 4) 

“Otherwise, my dear, it is out of question for us, I tell you, to see Him again. Such 




BALA-KANDA 


237 


an event can take place only when we have a rich stock of merit accumulated in previous 
existences.” (222) 

Someone else said, “Friend, you have spoken well. This union will be conducive 
to the best interests of all.” Still another said, “Sankara’s bow is hard to bend, while this 
swarthy lad is of delicate frame. Everything, my dear, is out of place,” Hearing this, 
another said in a soft voice, “Friend, with regard to this lad I have heard some people 
say that, though small in appearance, He wields a great power. Touched by the dust of 
His lotus-feet Ahalya, who had perpetrated a great sin, attained salvation. He will, 
therefore, surely break Siva’s bow; one should never commit the mistake of giving up 
this faith. The same Creator, who fashioned Sita with great skill, has preordained for her 
this dark-complexioned bridegroom.” Everyone was pleased to hear the words of this 
lady and softly exclaimed “Amen!” (1 — 4) 

In their gladness of heart troops of fair-faced, bright-eyed dames rained flowers on 
the princes. Wherever the two brothers went, there was supreme joy. (223) 


Chapter 46


238 



The two brothers reached the eastern quarter of the city, where the arena for the 
bow-sacrifice had been got ready. In the midst of a beautiful and spacious paved area a 
spotless altar was richly adorned. On the four sides of this altar were erected elevated 
and broad seats of gold to be occupied by the princes. Not far behind and surrounding them 
on all sides shone another circular tier of raised seats, which was of somewhat greater 
height and beautiful in everyway, and where the people of the city might come and take 
their seat. Close to these were constructed spacious and beautiful gallaries of glistening 
white, painted in diverse colours, whence ladies might view the spectacle seated in their 
appropriate places according to their family rank. The children of the town politely showed 
the Lord all the preparations speaking to Him in gentle words. (1 — 4) 

Thus finding an occasion for touching their charming limbs all the children were 
overwhelmed with love, experienced a thrill all over their body and their heart overflowed 
with joy on seeing the two brothers again and again. (224) 

239 


Finding all the children under the spell of affection, Sri Rama lovingly extolled the 
places shown by them. All of them would call the two brothers wherever they pleased 
and the two brothers went to them out of loving kindness. Sri Rama showed to His 
younger brother the arrangements that had been made there, speaking to him in soft, 
sweet and agreeable words. He in obedience to whose fiat Maya brings forth multitudes 
of universes in the quarter of a second, the same gracious Lord, conquered by devotion, 
looks with amazement on the arena for the bow-sacrifice. Having seen the whole show 
the two brothers returned to their Guru; but the thought of their being late disturbed their 
mind. The Lord, whose sublimity inspires terror into Terror itself thus manifests the glory 
of devotion. With many kind and courteous phrases they took leave of the youngsters 
much against the latter’s will. (1 — 4) 


Meekly and most submissively, with a mingled feeling of awe and love the two 
brothers bowed their head at the lotus feet of the preceptor (Visvamitra) and sat down 
with his permission. (225) 

At the approach of night the sage (Visvamitra) gave the word and all performed 
their evening devotions; and while the sage recited old legends and narratives, two 




240 


watches of the beautiful night passed. The chief of the sages, Visvamitra, then retired to 
his bed; and the two brothers began to shampooed his legs. The couple whose lotus legs 
are sought by men of dispassion muttering various sacred formulae and practising 
different kinds of Yoga (means of union with God) lovingly rubbed the lotus-like feet of 
their Guru, conquered as it were by his love. When the sage asked Him again and again, 
the Chief of Raghu’s race went to bed only then. Laksmana pressed the Lord’s feet to 
his bosom and shampooed them with reverence and love deriving supreme joy from this 
service. It was only when the Lord repeatedly said, “Retire now, my brother,” that he laid 
himself down cherishing his Brother’s lotus feet in his heart. (1 — 4) 
Towards the close of night, at the craway of cock, got up Laksmana. The Lord of 
the universe, the all-wise Sri Rama, also woke before His preceptor. (226) 

Having performed all the customary acts of purification, they went and finished 
their ablutions; and having gone through their daily routine of devotions etc., they 
bowed before the sage. When the time came, the two brothers took leave of the 
preceptor and went out to gather flowers. Having gone out they saw the lovely royal 
garden, enamoured of whose beauty the vernal season had taken its permanent abode 
there. It was planted with charming trees of various kinds and overhung with beautiful 
creepers of different colours. Rich in fresh leaf, fruit and flower they put to shame even 
kalpavrksa trees by their affluence. The feathered choir of the Catakas, cuckoos, parrots 
and Cakoras warbled and peacocks beautifully danced. In the centre of the garden a 
lovely lake shone bright with flights of steps made of many-coloured gems. Its limpid water 




BALA-KANDA 


241 


contained lotuses of various colours and was vocal with the cooing of aquatic birds and 
the humming of bees. (1 — 4) 


Both the Lord and His brother were delighted to behold the garden with its 
lake. Most lovely must have been that garden which delighted even Sri Rama (lit., the 
delighter of all) ! (227) 




After looking all about, and with the consent of the gardeners, the two brothers 
began in high glee to gather leaves and flowers. On that very occasion Sita too arrived 
there, having been sent by Her mother to worship Girija. She was accompanied by Her 
girl-companions, who were all lovely and intelligent. They sang melodies in an enchanting 
voice. Close to the lake stood a temple, sacred to Girija, which was beautiful beyond 
description, and captivated the mind of those who looked at it. Having taken a dip into 
the lake with Her companions, Sita went with a glad heart to Girija’s temple. She offered 
worship with great devotion and begged of the Goddess a handsome match worthy of 
Her. One of Her companions had strayed away from Her in order to have a look at the 
garden. She chanced to behold the two brothers and returned to Sita overwhelmed 
with love. (1 — 4) 

242 



When her companions saw her condition, her body thrilling all over and her eyes 
full of tears, they all asked her in gentle tones, “Tell us what gladdens your heart.” (228) 


“Two princes have come to see the garden, both of tender age and charming in 
everyway, one dark of hue and the other fair; how shall I describe them ? For speech 
is sightless, while the eyes are mute.” All the clever maidens were delighted to hear this. 
Perceiving the intense longing in Sita’s bosom one of them said, “They must be the two 
princes, my dear, who, I was told, arrived yesterday with the sage (Visvamitra), and who 
have captivated the heart of men and women of the city by casting the spell of their 
beauty. All are talking of their loveliness here, there and everywhere. We must see them, 
for they are worth seeing.” The words of this damsel highly pleased Sita; Her eyes were 
restless for the sight of the princes. With that kind friend to lead the way She followed; 
no one knew that Hers was an old love. (1 — 4) 

Recollecting Narada’s words She was filled with innocent love; and with anxious 
eyes She gazed all round like a startled fawn. (229) 

Chapter 47


BALA-KANDA 


243 



Hearing the tinkling of bangles, the small bells tied round the waist and 
the anklets Sri Rama thought within Himself and then said to Laksmana, “It seems 
as if Cupid has sounded his kettledrum with intent to conquer the universe.” So saying, 
He looked once again in the same direction (whence the sound came); and lo ! 
His eyes feasted themselves on Sita’s countenance even as the Cakora bird gazes 
on the moon. His charming eyes became motionless, as if Nimi* (the god of 
winking) had left the eyelids out of shyness. Sri Rama was filled with rapture to 
behold Sita’s beauty; He admired it in His heart, but utterance failed Him. He felt 
as if the Creator had put his whole creative skill in visible form and demonstrated 
it to the world at large. “She lends charm to charm itself,” He said to Himself, “and 
looks as if a flame of light is burning in a house of beauty. The similes already 
employed by the poets are all stale and hackneyed; to whom shall I liken the 
daughter of Videha?” (1 — 4) 


Thus describing to Himself Sita’s loveliness and reflecting on His own condition 
the Lord innocently spoke to His younger brother in terms appropriate to the 
occasion: — (230) 
 

* Nimi was a forbear of King Janaka. On his death his spirit obtained a seat on the eyelids of human 
beings and has ever since remained there. The poet here figuratively attributes the motionlessness of SrT 
Rama’s eyelids to the sudden departure therefrom of Nimi, who as a forbear of Janaka is described as loth to 
witness this exchange of pure love between Rama and Sfta. 




244 



“Brother, she is no other than the daughter of King Janaka, for whom the bow- 
sacrifice is being arranged. She has been escorted by her girl-companions to worship 
Goddess Gauri and is moving about in the garden diffusing light all about her. My heart 
which is naturally pure, is agitated by the sight of Her transcendent beauty. The reason of 
all this is known to God alone; but I tell you, brother, my right limbs are throbbing, which 
is an index of coming good fortune. It is a natural trait with the race of Raghu that they 
never set their heart on evil courses. As for myself I am fully confident of My mind, which 
has never sought another’s wife even in a dream. Rare in this world are those noble men 
who never turn their back on the foe in battle nor give their heart to or cast an amorous 
glance on another’s wife, and from whom no beggar meets with a rebuff. (1 — 4) 


While Sri Rama was talking to His younger brother in this strain, His mind, which 
was enamoured of Sita’s beauty, was all the time drinking in the loveliness of Her 
countenance, like a bee sucking the nectar from a lotus. (231) 


BALA-KANDA 


245 


Sita looked surprsingly all round; Her mind was at a loss as to where the princes 
had gone. Wherever the fawneyed princess cast Her glance, a continuous stream of white 
lotuses seemed to rain there. Her companions then pointed out to Her the two lovely 
brothers, the one dark, the other fair of hue, standing behind a fence of creepers. Beholding 
the beauty of the two princes Her eyes were filled with greed; they rejoiced as if they had 
discovered their longlost treasure. The eyes became motionless at the sight of Sri Rama’s 
loveliness; the eyelids too forgot to fall. Due to excess of love Her body-consciousness 
began to fail; it looked as if a Cakora bird were gazing at the autumnal moon. Receiving 
Sri Rama into the heart through the passage of the eyes, She cleverly shut Him up there 
by closing the doors of Her eyelids. When Her girl-companions found Sita overpowered 
with love, they were too much abashed to utter a word. (1 — 4) 

At that very moment the two brothers emerged from a bower. It looked as if a pair 
of spotless moons had shone forth tearing the veil of cloud. (232) 

The two gallant heroes were the very perfection of beauty; their bodies resembled 
in hue a blue and a yellow lotus respectively. Charming peacock-feathers adorned their head, 
which had bunches of flower-buds stuck here and there. A sectarian mark and beads 




246 


of perspiration glistened on their brow; while graceful pendants shed their lustre on their 
ears. With arched eyebrows and curly locks, eyes red as a lotus-bud and a lovely chin, 
nose and cheeks their gracious smile was soul-enthralling. The beauty of their countenance 
was more than I can describe; it would put to shame a myriad Cupids. They had a string of 
jewels on their breast; their lovely neck resembled a conch-shell in its spiral shape; while 
their mighty arms vied with the trunk of a young elephant, who was the very incarnation of 
Cupid. With a cup of leaves full of flowers in His left hand the dark-hued prince, my dear, is 
most charming. (1 — 4) 

Beholding the Ornament of the solar race, who had a slender waist like that of a 
lion and was clad in yellow, and who was the very embodiment of beauty and amiability, 
Sita’s companions forgot their very existence. (233) 

Recovering herself, one of Her clever companions grasped Slta by the hand and 
said to Her, “Meditate on Gauri afterwards; why not behold the princes just now ?” Sita 
then bashfully opened Her eyes and saw the two lions of Raghu’s race opposite Herself. 
Surveying Sri Rama’s beauty from head to foot in the reverse order* and remembering 
Her father’s vow she felt much perturbed. When Sita’s companions saw Her thus 

* Girls in India are coy by their very nature and would not have the audacity to look straight into the 
eyes of a suitor. Slta, who is the very embodiment of feminine virtues and the ideal of Indian womanhood, is, 
therefore, depicted here as beginning Her survey of SrT Rama’s beauty from His feet and gradually passing 
Her eyes to His head. It is unidiomatic in English to speak of one scanning a person from ‘foot to head’; hence 
the order had to be reversed in the rendering. It was, however, necessary to point out this radical difference 
between the Western and Indian cultures; and hence the words ‘in the reverse order’ have been added to 
keep the sense of the original intact while taking care not to allow the English idiom to suffer. 



BALA-KANDA 


247 

overcome with love, they all cried in alarm: “We are already late “Let us come again 
at this very hour tomorrow !” So saying one of them smiled within herself. Sita blushed 
at this pregnant remark. She got afraid of Her mother; for she felt it was already late. 
Recovering Herself with considerable effort she received Sri Rama into Her heart and 
conscious of Her dependence on Her sire returned home. (1 — 4) 

Under pretence of looking at a deer, bird or tree She turned again and again; and each 
time She gazed on the beauteous Hero of Raghu’s race, Her love waxed not a little. (234) 

Chapter 48
Drooping at the thought of the unyielding bow of Siva, She proceeded with the 
image of the swarthy form in Her heart. When the Lord perceived that Janaka’s 
Daughter, a fountain of bliss, affection, grace and goodness, was going, He sketched 
Her on the sheet of His heart with the soft ink of supreme love. Sita then sought 
Bhavani’s temple and, adoring Her feet, prayed to Her with joined palms: “Glory, all glory 
to You, O Daughter of the mountain-king ! Glory to You, who gaze on the countenance 
of the great Lord Siva as a Cakora bird on the moon. Glory to You, O Mother of the 
elephant-headed Ganesa and the six-faced Kartikeya and mother of the universe with 
limbs shining as lightning. You have no beginning, middle or end; Your infinite glory is a 
mystery even to the Vedas. You are responsible for the birth, maintenance and 
destruction of the universe; You enchant the whole universe and carry on Your sports 
independently of others. (1 — 4) 




248 


“Of all good women who adore their husband as a god, Mother, You rank foremost. Your 
immeasurable greatness is more than a thousand Saradas and Sesas could tell.” (235) 

“The fourfold rewards of life (viz., religious merit, worldly riches, sensuous enjoyment 
and Liberation) are easily attainable through Your service, O bestower of boons, beloved 
of Siva (the Slayer of Tripura)! All who adore Your lotus feet, O Shining One, attain 
happiness, be they gods, men or sages. You know well my heart’s longing since You 
ever dwell in the town of every heart. That is why I have refrained from openly declaring 
it.” With these words Videha’s Daughter clasped the feet of the image. Bhavanl was 
overcome by Her meekness and devotion; the wreath on the image dropped and the idol 
smiled. Sita reverently placed the divine gift on Her head. Gauri’s heart was filled with 
delight while She spoke, “Hear, Sita, my infallible blessing: Your heart’s desire shall be 
accomplished. Narada’s words are ever faultless and true; the suitor on whom Your 
heart is set shall, indeed, be Yours. (1 — 4) 

BALA-KANDA 

249 

“The dark-complexioned and naturally handsome suitor of whom You are enamoured 
shall, indeed, be Yours. The gracious and omniscient Lord is aware of your fidelity and 
love.” Sita and all Her companions were delighted at heart to hear this blessing from 
Gauri’s lips. Worshipping Goddess Bhavani again and again Sita, says Tulasidasa, 
returned to Her abode, rejoicing in Her heart. 

Finding Gauri favourably disposed towards Her, Sita was more glad of heart than 
words can tell. Her left limbs began to throb, indicating Her source of good fortune. (236) 

Inwardly praising Sita’s beauty, the two brothers returned to their Guru (Visvamitra). 
Sri Rama related everything to Kausika; for He was innocent of heart and free from all 
guile. Having got the flowers the sage performed his devotions and then blessed the two 
brothers, saying, “May your heart’s desire be accomplished.” Rama and Laksmana were 
glad to hear the benediction. After finishing his meals the great and illumined hermit, 
Visvamitra, began to recite old legends. The day was thus spent; and obtaining the 
Guru’s permission the two brothers proceeded to say their evening prayers. In the 
meantime the charming moon rose in the eastern horizon; perceiving that her orb 
resembled Sita’s face Sri Rama felt happy. The Lord then reasoned within Himself. The 
queen of night bears no resemblance to Sita. (1 — 4) 



250 
“Born of the ocean (with its salt water), with poison for her brother, dim and obscure 
by the day and with a dark spot in her orb, how can the poor and wretched moon be 
matched with Sita’s countenance ?”* (237) 
“Again, the moon waxes and wanes; she is the curse of lovesick damsels and is 
devoured by Rahu when she crosses the latter’s orbit. She causes anguish to the 
Cakravaka (the ruddy goose) and withers the lotus. O moon, there are numerous faults 
in you. One would incur the blame of having done a highly improper act by comparing 
you with the countenance of Videha’s daughter.” Thus finding in the moon a pretext for 
extolling the beauty of Sita’s countenance and perceiving that the night had far advanced, 
Sri Rama returned to His Guru; and bowing at the sage’s lotus feet and receiving his 
permission He retired to rest. At the close of night the Lord of Raghus woke; and looking 
towards His brother He began to speak thus, “Lo, brother, the day has dawned to the 
delight of the lotus, the Cakravaka and the whole world.” Joining both of his palms 
Laksmana gently spoke the following words indicative of the Lord’s glory: — (1 — 4) 
The moon is one of the fourteen jewels (treasures of the world) that were churned out of the ocean by the joint efforts of the gods and demons at the dawn of creation. It is to this Pauranika legend that the Lord refers to above. The very first product of this churning was poison, which was swallowed by Lord Siva. It is in this sense that the moon is spoken of as having poison for a brother. 
BALA-KANDA 
251 
“The day having dawned, the lily has faded and the brightness of the stars is 
dimmed, just as at the news of Your arrival all the princes (assembled here) have 
grown faint.” (238) 
“Though twinkling like stars, all the princes put together are unable to lift the thick 
darkness in the form of the bow. And just as lotuses and bees and the Cakravaka and 
various other birds rejoice over the termination of night, even so, my lord, all Your 
devotees will be glad when the bow is broken. Lo, the sun is up and the darkness has 
automatically disappeared; the stars have vanished out of sight and light flashes upon 
the world. Under pretence of its rising, O Lord of Raghus, the sun has demonstrated 
to all the princes the glory of my lord (Yourself). It is in order to reveal the might of 
Your arms that the process of breaking the bow has been set into operation.” The Lord 
smiled at these remarks of His brother. He who is pure by His very nature then 
performed the daily acts of purification and bathed, and after finishing the daily routine 
of prayer etc., called on His Guru and the two brothers bowed their graceful heads at 
his lotusfeet. Meanwhile King Janaka summoned his preceptor Satananda and sent 
him at once to the sage Kausika. Satananda communicated to Visvamitra Janaka’s 
humble submission and Visvamitra gladly sent for the two brothers. (1 — 5) 

252 


Adoring Satananda’s feet the Lord went and sat down by His Guru; the sage then 
said, “Come on, my son: Janaka has sent for us.” (239) 
 

“Let us go and see how Sita elects her husband; we have yet to see whom 
Providence chooses to honour.” Said Laksmana, “He alone deserves glory, my lord, who 
enjoys your favour.” The whole company of hermits rejoiced to hear these apt words and 
with a delighted heart they all gave their blessing to him. Accompanied by the whole 
throng of hermits the gracious Lord then proceeded to visit the arena intended for the 
bow-sacrifice. When the inhabitants of the town got the news that the two brothers had 
reached the arena, they all sallied forth, oblivious of their homes and duties — men and 
women, young and old and even children. When Janaka saw that a huge crowd had 
collected there, he sent for all his trusted servants and said, “Go and see all the people 
at once and marshal them to their proper seats.” (1 — 4) 

Addressing soft and polite words to the citizens, the servants seated them all, 
both men and women, in their appropriate places, whether noble or middling, humble 
or low. (240) 


BALA-KANDA 


253 
Chapter 49

Meanwhile there arrived the two princes, the very abodes of beauty as it were, 
both ocean of goodness, polished in manners and gallent heroes, charming of forms, 
the one dark and the other fair. Shining bright in the galaxy of princes, they looked like 
two full moons in a circle of stars. Everyone looked on the Lord’s form according to 
the conception each had about Him. Those who were surpassingly staunch in battle 
gazed on His form as though He was the heroic sentiment personified. The wicked 
kings trembled at the sight of the Lord as if He had a most terrible form. The demons, 
who were cunningly disguised as princes, beheld the Lord as Death in visible form, 
while the citizens regarded the two brothers as the ornaments of humanity and the 
delight of their eyes. (1 — 4) 

With joy in their heart the women saw Him according to the attitude of mind each 
had towards Him, as if the erotic sentiment itself had appeared in an utterly incomparable 
form. (241) 

254 



The wise saw the Lord in His cosmic form, with many faces, hands, feet, eyes 
and heads. And how did He appear to Janaka’s kinsmen? Like one’s own beloved 
relation. The queen, no less than the king, regarded Him with unspeakable love like a 
dear child. To the Yogis (those ever united with God) He shone forth as no other than 
the highest truth, placid, unsullied, equipoised, and resplendent by its very nature. The 
devotees of Sri Hari beheld the two brothers as their beloved deity, the fountain of all 
joy. The emotion of love and joy with which Sita gazed on Sri Rama was ineffable. She 
felt the emotion in Her breast, but could not utter it; how, then, can a poet describe it? 
In this way everyone regarded the Lord of Ayodhya according to the attitude of mind 
each had towards Him. (1 — 4) 

Thus shone in the assembly of kings the two lovely princes of Ayodhya, the one 
dark and the other fair of form, catching the eyes of the whole universe. (242) 

Chapter 50

* BALA-KANDA * 255 

Both were embodiments of natural grace; even millions of Cupids were a poor 
match for them. Their charming faces mocked the autumnal moon, and their lotus-like 
eyes were soul-ravishing. Their winning glances captivated the heart of even Cupid; 
they were so unspeakably endearing. With beautiful cheeks, ears adorned with 
swinging pendants, a charming chin and lips and a sweet voice, their smile ridiculed 
the moonbeams. With arched eyebrows and a beautiful nose, the sacred mark shone 
on their broad forehead, and their locks of hair put to shame a swarm of bees. Yellow 
caps of a rectangular shape, which were embroidered here and there with figures of 
flower-buds, adorned their heads. Their necks, which vied in their spiral form with a 
conch-shell bore a triple line, which constituted as it were the high watermark of beauty 
in all the three worlds. (1 — 4) 


Their breast was adorned with necklace of pearls found in elephants foreheads 
and wreaths of TulasT. With shoulders resembling the lump of a bull they stood like lions 
and had mighty long arms. (243) 

Chapter 51
They bore at their back a quiver secured with a yellow cloth wrapped round their 
waist, and held an arrow in their right hand; while a bow and a charming sacred thread, 
also of yellow tint, were slung across their left shoulder. In short, the two princes were 
lovely from head to foot and were the very embodiments of great charm. Everyone who 
saw them felt delighted; people gazed at them with unwinking eyes and their pupils too did 
not move. King Janaka himself rejoiced to behold the two brothers; presently he went and 




256 

clasped the sage’s lotus-feet. Paying him homage he related to him his story and showed 
him round the whole arena. Whithersoever the two elegant princes betook themselves, 
all regarded them with wonder. Every man found Sri Rama facing himself; but none could 
perceive the great mystery behind it. The sage told the king that the arrangements were 
splendid; and the king was highly satisfied and pleased to hear this. (1 — 4) 

Of all the tiers of raised seats one was beautiful, bright and capacious above all 
the rest; the king seated the two brothers alongwith the sage thereon. (244) 


All the kings were disheartened at the sight of the Lord, just as stars fade away 
with the rising of the full moon. For they all felt inwardly assured that Rama would 
undoubtedly break the bow; or, even if the huge bow of Siva proved too strong for Him, 
that Sita would still place the garland of victory round His neck. They therefore, said to 
one another, “Realizing this, brothers, let us turn homewards, casting to the winds all 
glory, fame, strength and pride.” Other princes, who were blinded with ignorance and 
pride, laughed at this and said, “Union with the princess is a far cry for Rama even if he 
succeeds in breaking the bow; who, then, can wed her without breaking it ? Should 
Death himself for once come forth against us, even him we would conquer in battle for 
Sita’s sake.” At this other princes, who were pious and sensible and devoted to Sri Hari, 
smiled and said: — (1 — 4) 


BALA-KANDA 


257 

 “Rama will certainly marry Sita to the discomfiture of these arrogant princes; for who 
can conquer in battle the valiant sons of Dasaratha? (245) 

Chapter 52
“Do not thus brag unnecssarily: hunger cannot be satiated with imaginary 
sweets. Listen to this my most salutary advice; be inwardly assured that Sita is no other 
than the Mother of the universe. And recognizing the Lord of Raghus as the father of 
the universe, feast your eyes to their fill on His beauty. Fountains of joy and 
embodiments of all virtues, these two charming brothers have their abode in Sambhu’s 
heart. Leaving an ocean of nectar, which is so near, why should you run in pursuit 
of a mirage and court death? Or else do whatever pleases you individually; we for our 
part have reaped today the fruit of our human birth.” So saying the good kings turned 
to gaze with affection on the picture of incomparable beauty; while in heaven the gods 
witnessed the spectacle from their aerial cars, and raining down flowers sang in 
melodious strains. (1 — 4) 

Finding it an appropriate occasion Janaka then sent for Sita; and Her companions, 
all lovely and accomplished, escorted Her with due honour. (246) 



258 

Slta’s beauty defies all description, Mother of the universe that She is and an 
embodiment of charm and excellence. All comparisons seem to me too poor; for they 
have affinity with the limbs of mortal women. Proceeding to depict Sita with the help of 
those very similes why should one earn the title of an unworthy poet and court ill-repute? 
Should Sita be likened to any woman of this material creation, where in this world shall 
one come across such a lovely damsel? The goddess of speech (SarasvatT), for 
instance, is a chatterer; while Bhavani possesses only half a body (the other half being 
represented by her lord, Siva). And Rati (Love’s consort) is extremely distressed by the 
thought of her husband being without a form. And it is quite out of the question to 
compare Videha’s Daughter with Rama, who has poison and spirituous liquor for her 
dear brothers. Supposing there was an ocean of nectar in the form of loveliness and the 
tortoise serving as a base for churning it was an embodiment of consummate beauty, 
and if splendour itself were to take the form of a cord, the erotic sentiment should 
crystallize and assume the shape of Mount Mandara and the god of love himself were 
to churn this ocean with his own hands — (1 — 4) 

And if from such churning were to be born a Laksml, who was the source of 
all loveliness and joy, the poet would even then hesitatingly declare her as analogous 
to Sita. (247) 
BALA-KANDA 
259 
Sita’s clever companions escorted Her to the arena, singing songs in a charming 
voice. A beautiful Sari (covering for the body) adorned Her youthful frame; the Mother of 
the universe was incomparable in her exquisite beauty. Ornaments of all kinds had been 
beautifully set in their appropriate places, each limb having been decked by Her 
companions with great care. When Sita stepped into the arena, men and women alike 
were fascinated by Her charms. The gods gladly sounded their kettledrums, while 
celestial damsels rained down flowers in the midst of songs. In Her lotus-like hands 
sparkled the wreath of victory, as She cast a hurried glance at all the princes. While Sita 
looked for Sri Rama with anxious heart, all the princes found themselves in the grip of 
infatuation. Presently Sita discovered the two brothers by the side of the sage, and Her 
eyes greedily fell on them as on a long-lost treasure. (1 — 4) 

Out of natural bashfulness that She felt in the presence of elders and at the sight 
of the vast assemblage, Sita shrank into Herself; and drawing the Hero of Raghu’s race 
into Her heart She turned Her eyes towards Her companions. (248) 
260 
Beholding Sri Rama’s beauty and Sita’s loveliness, men and women alike forgot 
to close their eyelids. All of them felt anxious in their heart but hesitated to speak; 
they inwardly prayed to the Creator, “Quickly take away, O Creator, Janaka’s stupidity 
and give him right understanding like ours, so that the king without the least scruple 
may abandon his vow and give Sita in marriage to Rama. The world will speak well 
of him and the idea will find favour with all. On the other hand, if he persists in his folly, 
he shall have to rue it in the end. Everyone is absorbed in the ardent feeling that the 
dark-complexioned youth is a suitable match for Janaka’s daughter.” Then Janaka 
summoned the heralds, and they came eulogizing his race. The king said, “Go round 
and proclaim my vow.” Forthwith they proceeded on their mission; there was not a little 
joy in their heart. (1 — 4) 
The heralds then uttered these polite words, “Listen all princes: with our long arms 
uplifted we announce to you King Videha’s vow: — (249) 
BALA-KANDA 
261 
“The might of arm of the various princes stands as the moon, while Siva’s bow 
is the planet Rahu as it were; it is massive and unyielding, as is well-known to all. Even 
the great champions Ravana and Banasura quietly slipped away as soon as they saw 
the bow. Whoever in this royal assembly breaks today the yonder unbending bow of Siva 
shall be unhesitatingly and insistently wedded by Videha’s daughter and shall triumph 
over all the three worlds.” Hearing the vow all the princes were filled with longing, while 
those who prided on their valour felt very indignant. Girding up their loins they rose 
impatiently and bowing their heads to their chosen deity went ahead. They cast an angry 
look at Siva’s bow, grapled with it with steady aim and exerted all their strength; but the 
bow refused to be lifted. Those princes, however, who had any sense at all did not even 
approach the bow. (1 — 4) 
Those foolish kings indignantly strained at the bow and retired in shamefrlly when 
it refused to leave its position, as though it grew more and more wughty by absorbing 
the might of arm of each successive warrior. (250) 
Ten thousand kings then proceeded all at once to raise it; but it baffled all attempts 
at moving it. Sambhu’s bow did not stir in the same way as the mind of a virtuous lady 
refuses to yield to the words of a gallant. All the princes made themselves butts of 
ridicule like a recluse without dispassion. Helplessly forfeiting their fame, glory and great 
valour to the bow they returned. Confused and disheartened, the kings went and sat in 
the midst of their own company. Seeing the kings thus frustrated, King Janaka got 
impatient and spoke words as if in anger; “Hearing the vow made by me many a king 

262 
has come from diverse parts of the globe; gods and demons in human form and many 
other heroes, staunch in fight, have assembled. (1 — 4) 
“A lovely bride, a grand triumph and splendid renown are the prize; but Brahma, 
it seems, has not yet created the man who may break the bow and win the above 
rewards.” (251) 
“Tell me, who would not have this prize? But none could string the bow. Let alone 
stringing or breaking it, there was not one of you, brothers, who could stir it even a inch 
breadth from its place. Now no one who prides on his valour should feel offended if I assert 
that there is no hero left on earth to my mind. Give up all hope and go back to your homes. 
It is not the will of Providence that Sita should be married. All my religious merits shall be 
gone if I abandon my vow. The princess must remain a maid; what can I do? Had I known, 
brothers, that there are no more heroes in the world, I would not have made myself a 
laughing-stock by undertaking such a vow.” All who heard Janaka’s words, men and women 
alike, felt distressed at the sight of Janaki. Laksmana, however got incensed: his eyebrows 
were knit, his lips quivered and his eyes shot fire. (1 — 4) 

BALA-KANDA 


263 
For fear of Sri Rama he could not speak, though Janaka’s words pierced his heart 
like an arrow; yet at last, bowing his head at Sri Rama’s lotus-feet he spoke words which 
were impregnated with truth: — (252) 

Chapter 53
“In an assembly where any one of Raghu’s race is present no one would dare 
speak such scandalous words as Janaka has spoken, even though conscious of the 
presence of Sri Rama, the Jewel of Raghu’s race. (Turning towards his brother, he 
added) “Listen, O Delighter of the solar race, I sincerely tell You, without any vain 
boasting: if I but have Your permission, I will lift the round world like a ball and smash 
it like an ill-baked earthen jar; and by the glory of Your majesty, O blessed Lord, 
I can break Mount Meru like a radish. What, then, is this wretched old bow? Realizing 
this, my Lord, let me have Your command and see what wonders I work; I will string 
the bow as though it were a lotus-stalk and run with it not less than eight hundred 
miles. (1 — 4) 
“By the might of Your glory, O Lord, I will snap it like the stalk of a mushroom. Or, 
if I fail, I swear by Your feet, never to handle a bow or quiver again.” (253) 


264 
As Laksmana spoke these angry words, the earth shook and the elephants 
supporting the quarters tottered. The whole assembly, including all the princes, was 
struck with terror; Sita felt delighted at heart, while Janaka blushed. The preceptor 
(Visvamitra), the Lord of Raghus and all the hermits were glad of heart and thrilled all 
over again and again, affectionately Sri Rama checked Laksmana and made him sit 
beside Him. Perceiving that it was a propitious time, Visvamitra said in most endearing 
terms, “Up, Rama, break the bow of Siva and relieve Janaka, my boy, of his anguish.” 
On hearing the Guru’s words Sri Rama bowed His head at his feet; there was no joy or 
sorrow in His heart. He stood up in all His native grace, putting to shame a young lion 
by His elegant carriage. (1 — 4) 

As the Chief of the Raghus rose on His elevated seat like the morning sun rising 
on the mountain, all the saints were delighted like so many lotuses and their eyes were 
glad as bees at the return of day. (254) 


BALA-KANDA 


265 

Chapter 54

The hopes of the rival kings vanished as night and their boasts died away like the 
serried stars. The arrogant princes shrivelled up like the lilies and the false kings shrank 
away like owls. Sages and gods, like the Cakravaka bird, were rid of their sorrow and 
rained down flowers in token of their homage. Affectionately reverencing the Guru’s feet 
Sri Rama asked leave of the Munis. The Lord of all creation then stepped forth in His 
natural grace with the tread of a noble and beautiful elephant in rut. As Sri Rama moved 
ahead all men and women of the city rejoiced and thrilled all over their body. Invoking 
the manes and gods and recalling their own past good deeds they prayed: “If our religious 
merits are of any value, O Lord Ganesa may Rama snap the bow of Siva as it were a 
lotus-stalk.” (1 — 4) 

Lovingly gazing on Sri Rama and bidding her companions draw near, Sita’s mother 
spoke words full of anguish out of affection: — (255) 

“Who even those are called our friends, dear ones, are mere spectators of a show; 
no one urges the preceptor (Visvamitra) and tells him that the two princes are yet boys 
and that such insistence on his part is not desirable. Knowing that Ravana and Banasura did 




266 

not even touch the bow and that all other kings were worsted in spite of all their boasts, 
strange that he should give the same bow into the hands of this young prince; can cygnets 
ever lift Mount Mandara? Good sense has taken leave of the king; and unknown are the 
dispensation of Providence, dear ones,” One of her sharp-witted companions gently replied, 
“The glorious are not to be lightly regarded, O queen. What comparison is there between the 
sage Agastya, who was born of a jar, and the vast ocean? Yet the sage drained it dry, and 
his good fame has spread throughout the world. The orb of the sun is so small to look at, but 
the moment it rises the darkness of all the three worlds disappears. (1 — 4) 

“A sacred formula, indeed, is very small, although it has under its sway Brahma, 
Hari, Hara and all other gods. A tiny goad governs the mightiest and most furious 
elephant.” (256) 
 “Armed with a bow and arrows of flowers Cupid has brought the whole universe 
under subjection. Realizing this, O good lady, give up all doubt; Rama, O Queen, will 
assuredly break the bow, I tell you.” The queen felt reassured at these words of her 
companion; her despondency was gone and her love for Sri Rama grew. Then, casting 
a glance towards Sri Rama, Videha’s daughter implored with anxious heart each god in 
turn. She inwardly prayed in a distressed state of mind: “Be gracious to me. O great Lord 
Siva and Bhavani, and reward my services by lightening the weight of the bow out of 
affection for me. O god Ganesa, the chief of diva’s attendants, O bestower of boons, it 
is for this day that I have adored You. Listening to my repeated supplication, therefore, 
reduce the weight of the bow to a mere trifle.” (1 — 4) 




BALA-KANDA 


267 

Gazing repeatedly on the person of Sri Rama and summoning courage Sita 
prayed to gods. Her eyes were filled with tears of love and the hair on Her body stood 
on their end. (257) 

She feasted Her eyes to their fill on Sri Rama’s beauty; but then the thought of Her 
father’s vow agitated Her mind. She said to Herself.” Alas, my father has made a terrible 
resolve having no regard to good or evil consequences. The ministers are afraid; therefore 
none of them gives him good counsel. It is all the more pity that it should be so in a 
conclave of wise men. While on this side stands the bow harder than adamant, on the 
other side we find that dark-complexioned prince of delicate frame and tender age. How 
then, O god, can I maintain my balance of mind? Is a diamond ever pierced with the 
pointed end of a Sirisa flower? The sense of the whole assembly has become dull; hence 
my only hope now lies in you, O Sambhu’s bow. Imparting your heaviness to the assembly 
grow light yourself at the sight of (in proportion to the size of) Sri Rama.” Sita felt much 
agitated at heart; an instant hung heavy on Her as a hundred Yugas. (1 — 4) 





268 



Gazing now at the Lord and now at the ground, Her restless eyes sparkled as if 
two Cupid’s fish disported themselves in the pail-like orb of the moon. (258) 

Chapter 55
Held captive within Her lotus-like mouth Her bee-like speech did not stir out for fear 
of the night of modesty. Tears remained confined within the corner of Her eyes,* just as 
the gold of a stingy miser remains buried in a nook of his house. Sita felt abashed when 
She perceived Her great agitation of mind; summoning up courage in Her heart, therefore, 
She confidently said to Herself, “If I am true to my vow in thought, word and deed, and 
if my mind is really attached to the lotus-feet of 6ri Rama, I am sure God, who dwells 
in the heart of all, will make me Sri Rama’s bondslave; for one gets united without doubt 
with him for whom one cherishes true love.” Casting a glance at the Lord She resolved 
to love Him even at the cost of Her life. Sri Rama, the embodiment of compassion, 
understood it all; looking at Sita He glanced at the bow as Garuda (the king of birds ) 
would gaze on a poor little snake. (1 — 4) 

When Laksmana perceived that the Jewel of Raghu’s race had cast a glance at 
the bow of Hara, the hair on his body stood erect and he uttered the following words 
pressing the crust of the earth under his foot: — (259) 

* Shedding of tears is regarded in India as an ill-omen; therefore, on auspicious occasions Indian 
women would take particular care not to allow tears to drop from their eyes. 




BALA-KANDA 


269 



“O elephants guarding the cardinal points, O divine tortoise*, O serpent-king, and 
O divine boar*, steadily hold the earth that it may not shake. Sri Rama seeks to break the 
bow of Sankara; therefore, listen to my command and be ready.” When Rama drew near 
to the bow, men and women present there invoked in His behalf the help of gods as well 
as of their past good deeds. The doubts and ignorance of all who had assembled there, 
the arrogance of the foolish kings, the proud pretensions of Parasurama (the Chief of 
Bhrgu’s race), the apprehension of gods and the great sages, the distress of Sita, King 
Janaka’s remorse and the fire of the queen’s terrible agony — all these boarded together the 
great bark of Sambhu’s bow, with whose help they sought to cross the boundless ocean 
of Sri Rama’s strength of arm; but there was no helmsman to steer the ship. (1 — 4) 


Rama first looked at the crowd of spectators and found them motionless as the 
figures of a drawing. The gracious Lord then turned His eyes towards Sita and perceived 
Her in deep distress. (260) 

* The divine tortoise referred to here is the same who served as the base for churning the ocean of 
milk at the dawn of creation. And the divine boar refers to the manifestation of the Lord as a boar in order to lift 
the earth out of the waters in which the demon Hiranyaksa had submerged it. The tortoise as well as the boar are represented here as ever holding the earth, conjointly with the serpent-king, the one on its back and the other on its tusks. 




270 



He found Videha’s Daughter greatly agitated; every moment that passed hung on 
Her as a whole life-time of the universe. If a thirsty man dies for want of water, of what 
avail is a lake of nectar after death. What good is a shower when the whole crop is dried 
up; what use repenting over an opportunity lost? Thinking thus within Himself the Lord 
looked at Janaka’s Daughter and thrilled all over to perceive Her singular devotion. He 
inwardly made obeisance to His preceptor (Visvamitra), and took up the bow with great 
agility. The bow gleamed like a flash of lightning as He grasped it in His hand. And then 
it appeared like a circle in the sky. No one knew when He took it in His hands, strung 
it and drew it tight; everyone only saw Him standing (with the bow drawn). Instantly Sri 
Rama broke the bow in halves; the awful crash resounded through all the spheres. 

( 1 - 4 ) 

The awful crash reached through the spheres; the horses of the sun-god strayed 
from their course; the elephants of the quarters trumpeted, the earth shook; the serpent- 
king, the divine boar and the divine tortoise fidgeted about, Gods, demons and sages put 
their hands to their ears, and all began anxiously to ponder the cause; but when they 
learnt, says Tulasidasa, that Sri Rama had broken the bow, they uttered shouts of 
victory. 




BALA-KANDA 
271 
The bow of Sankara was the bark and Rama’s strength of arm was the ocean to 
be crossed with its aid. The whole host (of which we have spoken above), that had 
boarded the ship out of ignorance, was drowned (with the bark). (261) 
The Lord tossed on ground the two broken pieces of the bow, and everyone 
rejoiced at the sight. Visvamitra stood as the holy ocean, full of the sweet and 
unfathomable water of love. Beholding Sri Rama’s beauty, which represented the full 
moon, the sage felt an increasing thrill of joy, which may be compared to a rising tide in 
the ocean. Kettledrums sounded with great noise in the heavens; celestial damsels sang 
and danced. Brahma and the other gods, Siddhas and great sages praised the Lord and 
gave Him blessings raining down wreaths and flowers of various colours; the Kinnaras 
(a class of demigods) sang melodious strains. The shouts of victory re-echoed throughout 
the universe; the crash that followed the breaking of the bow was drowned in it. 
Everywhere men and women in their joy kept saying that Rama had broken the massive 
bow of Sambhu. (1 — 4) 


Talented bards, minstrels and panegyrists sang praises; and everybody gave 
away horses, elephants, riches, jewels and raiments as an act of invocation of God’s 
blessings on the youthful champion. (262) 




272 

There was a crash of cymbals and tabors, conches and clarionets, drums and 
sweet-sounding kettledrums, both large and small; and many other charming instruments 
also played. Everywhere young women sang auspicious strains. The queen with her 
companions was much delighted, as though a withering crop of paddy had been 
refreshed by a shower. King Janaka was now care-free and felt gratified as if a tired 
swimmer had reached a shallow. The kings’ countenance fell at the breaking of the bow, 
just as a lamp is dimmed at dawn of day. Sita’s delight could only be compared to that 
of a female Cataka* bird on receiving a rain-drop when the sun is in the same longitude 
as the constellation named Svati* (Arcturus). Laksmana fixed his eyes on Rama as the 
young of a Cakora bird gazes on the moon. Satananda then gave the word and Sita 
advanced towards Rama. (1 — 4) 
Accompanied by Her fair and talented companions, who were singing festal 
songs, She paced like a cygnet, Her limbs possessing infinite charm. (263) 

* According to the Indian tradition a Cataka bird would slake its thirst only with a rain-drop obtained 
when the sun is in the same longitude as the Arcturus (which is generally in the month of October, a month when showers are of rare occurrence). 




BALA-KANDA 


273 

In the midst of Her companions Sita shone as a personification of supreme beauty 
among other embodiments of beauty. She held in Her lotus hands the fair wreath of 
victory, resplendent with the glory of triumph over the whole universe. While Her body 
shrank with modesty, Her heart was full of rapture; Her hidden love could not be 
perceived by others. As She drew near and beheld Sri Rama’s beauty, Princess Sita 
stood motionless as a portrait. A clever companion, who perceived Her in this condition, 
exhorted Her saying,” Invest the bridegroom with the beautiful wreath of victory.” At this 
She raised the wreath with both of Her hands, but was too overwhelmed with emotion 
to garland Him. In this act Her uplifted hands shone as if a pair of lotuses with their stalks 
were timidly investing the moon with a wreath of victory. At this charming sight Her 
companions broke into a song, while Sita placed the wreath of victory round Sri Rama’s 
neck so as to adorn His breast. (1 — 4) 

Witnessing the wreath of victory resting on Sri Rama’s bosom, gods rained down 
flowers; while the kings all shrank in confusion like lillies at the rising of the sun. (264) 

274 
There was music both in the city and in the heavens; while the wicked were 
downcast, the virtuous beamed with joy. Gods, Kinnaras, men, Nagas and great sages 
uttered blessings with shouts of victory. Celestial dames danced and sang and handfuls 
of flowers were showered again and again. Here and there the Brahmanas recited the 
Vedas, while panegyrists sang praises. The glad tidings spread throughout the earth, the 
subterranean regions and heaven that Sri Rama had broken the bow and won the hand 
of Sita. The people of the city waved lights round the pair in order to ward off evil; and 
regardless of their means they scattered gifts in profusion as an act of invocation of 
Divine blessings on the couple. The pair of Sri Rama and Sita shone as if beauty and 
the sentiment of Love had met together in human form. Her companions urged Her, ’’Sita, 
clasp your lord’s feet.” But Sita was too much afraid to touch His feet. (1 — 4) 

Remembering the fate of the sage Gautama’s wife, Ahalya, She would not touch 
His feet with Her hands; the Jewel of Raghu’s race inwardly smiled to perceive Her 
transcendent love. (265) 




BALA-KANDA 


275 


Then, as they looked on Slta, a few princes were filled with longing for her; those 
wicked, degenerate fools grew indignant. Rising from their seats one after another and 
donning their armour the wretches began to brag about. Someone said, “Carry off Slta 
by force and capturing the two princes hold them in bondage. No purpose will be served 
by merely breaking the bow; for who shall marry the princess while we still live? Should 
Janaka come forward to help them, rout him in battle alongwith the two brothers.” When 
the good kings heard these words, they said, “Shame itself feels shy in approaching this 
assembly of princes. Your might, glory, valour, fame and honour have been shattered 
alongwith the bow. Is it the same valour of which you are boasting, or have you since 
acquired it anew from somewhere else? It is because such is your mentality that God 
has blackened your faces.” (1 — 4) 

“Giving up jealousy, arrogance and anger, therefore, feast your eyes upon Rama; 
and knowing Laksmana’s wrath to be a blazing fire, do not allow yourselves to be 
consumed by it like a moth.” (266) 
 “As a crow should seek an offering set apart for Garuda (the king of birds), as a 
rabbit should covet the share of a lion, as a man who is angry without any cause should 
expect happiness, as an enemy of Siva should crave for riches of all kinds, as a greedy 
and covetous man should long for good fame and as a gallant should aspire to be free 
from scandal, and as one who is averse to Sri Hari’s feet, should hanker after the highest 
destiny (Liberation), your longing, O princes, (for Slta) is of the same category.” When 
Sita heard the tumult, She got afraid and Her companions took Her to the queen; while 




276 


Sri Rama advanced to His Guru, easy in mind and inwardly praising Her affection. The 
queens as well as Sita were filled with anxiety and wondered what Providence had in 
store for them. On hearing the words of the princes Laksmana looked hither and thither; 
for fear of Rama, however, he could not speak. (1 — 4) 

With fiery eyes and knitted brows he cast an angry look at the kings, as though, 
at the sight of a herd of wild elephants in rut, a lion’s whelp were eager to pounce on 
them. (267) 
Seeing the uproar the women of the city were all distressed and joined in cursing the 
princes. The very moment arrived the sage Parasurama, a very sun to the lotus-like race 
of Bhfgu, led by the news of the breaking of the bow. At his very sight the kings all cowered 
down even as a quail would shrink beneath the swoop of a hawk. A coat of ashes looked 
most charming on his fair body; his broad forehead was adorned with a Tripundra (as 
peculiar mark consisting of three horizontal lines, sacred to Siva). Having matted locks on 
the head, his handsome moonlike face was a bit reddened with anger; with knitted brows 
and eyes inflamed with passion, his natural look gave one the impression that he was 
enraged. He had well-built shoulders like those of a bull and a broad chest and long arms; 
he was adorned with a beautiful sacred thread, rosary and deerskin. With an anchorite’s 
covering about his loins and a pair of quivers fastened by his side, he held a bow and 
arrows in his hands and an axe upon his fair shoulder. (1 — 4) 




BALA-KANDA 
277 
Though serene in attire, he had a cruel record of deeds; his appear, therefore, 
defied description. It looked as if the heroic sentiment had taken the form of a hermit and 
arrived where the kings had assembled. (268) 
Beholding the frightful figure of Parasurama the kings all rose in consternation; and 
mentioning his own as well as his father’s name, each fell prostrate on the ground before 
him. Even he on whom Parasurama cast a friendly look in a natural way thought the 
sands of his life had run out. Then came Janaka and bowed his head; and sending for 
Sita he made Her pay homage to the sage. Her companions rejoiced when he bestowed 
his blessing on Her, and cleverly took Her where the other ladies were. Next came 
Visvamitra, who met him and placed the two brothers at his lotus feet, saying that they 
were King Dasaratha’s sons, Rama and Laksmana by name; seeing the well-matched 
pair, he blessed them. His eyes were rivetted on Sri Rama’s incomparable beauty, which 
would humble the pride of Cupid himself. (1 — 4) 

Then he looked round, and though knowing everything, he asked Videha, like one 
ignorant, “Tell me, what has attracted all this crowd here?” And as he spoke thus wrath 
took possession of his whole being. (269) 




278 

Janaka narrated to him the whole history, mentioning what had brought all the 
kings there, on hearing this reply Parasurama turned round, and looking in the other 
direction he espied the fragments of the bow lying on the ground. Flying into a rage he 
spoke in harsh tones, “Tell me, O stupid Janaka, who has broken the bow ? Show him 
at once, or this very day I will overthrow the whole tract of land over which your 
dominion extends.” In his excess of fear, the king would make no answer; and the 
wicked kings were glad of heart. Gods, sages, Nagas and the people of the city were 
all filled with anxiety; their hearts were much agitated. Sita’s mother lamented within 
herself, saying, “Alas ! God has sported the game.” When Slta heard of Parasurama’s 
temperament, even half a moment passed to Her like a whole life-time of the universe. 
(1-4) 
When the Hero of Raghu’s race saw everyone seized with panic and perceived 
Janaki’s anxiety, He interposed; there was neither joy nor sorrow in His heart. (270) 

BALA-KANDA 


279 

“My lord, it must be some one of your servants who has broken the bow of Siva. 
What is your command? Why not tell me?” At this the furious sage was all the more 
incensed, and said, “A servant is he who does service; having played the role of an 
enemy, one should give battle, Listen. O Rama; whoever has broken Siva’s bow is my 
enemy no less than the thousand-armed KartavTrya. Let him stand apart, leaving this 
assembly; or else everyone of these kings shall be slain.” Hearing the sage’s words 
Laksmana smiled and said insulting Parasurama (the wielder of an axe), “I have broken 
many a small bow in my childhood; but you never grew so angry, my lord. Why should 
you be so fond of this particular bow?” At this the Chief of Bhrgu’s race burst out in 
a fury: — (1 — 4) 

“O young prince, being in the grip of death you have no control over your 
speech. Would you compare to a small bow the mighty bow of Siva, that is known 
throughout the world?” (271) 
280 
Said Laksmana with a smile, “Listen, holy Sir: to my mind all bows are alike. What 
gain or loss can there be in the breaking of a worn-out bow ?” Sri Rama mistook it for 
a new one, and at His very touch it broke in two; the Lord of Raghus, therefore, was not 
to blame for it either. Why, then, be angry, reverend sir, for no cause?” Casting a glance 
at his axe, Parasurama replied, “O foolish child, have you never heard of my temper ? 
I slay you not because, as I say, you are a child yet; do you take me for a mere 
anchorite, O dullard? I have been a celibate from my very boyhood, but also an irascible 
one; and I am known throughout the world as a sworn enemy of the Ksatriya race. By 
the might of my arm I made the earth kingless and bestowed it time after time upon the 
Brahmanas. Look at this axe, which lopped off the arms of Sahasrabahu (the thousand- 
armed Kartavirya), O youthful prince. (1 — 4) 

“Do not bring woe to your parents, O princely lad, My most cruel axe has 
exterminated even unborn offspring in the womb.” (272) 
Laksmana smilingly retorted in a mild tone, “Ah, the great sage considers himself 
an extraordinary warrior! He flaunts his axe before me again and again, as if he would 
blow away a mountain with a mere puff of breath. Here there is no pumpkin in the bud 
that would wither away as soon as an index finger is raised against it. It was only when 
I saw you armed with an axe and a bow and arrows that I spoke with some pride. Now 
that I understand you are a descendant of Bhrgu and perceive a sacred thread on your 
person, I suppress my anger and put up with whatever you say. In our family valour is 
never shown against gods, the Brahmanas, devotees of Sri Hari and the cow; for by 
killing any of these we incur sin while a defeat at their hands will bring disrepute on us. 
We should throw ourselves at your feet even if you strike us. Every word of yours is as 
incisive as millions of thunderbolts; the bow and arrows and the axe are, therefore, an 
unnecessary burden to you. (1 — 4) 

“Pardon me, O great and illumined hermit, if I have said anything unseemly at the 
sight of your weapons.” Hearing this, the jewel of Bhrgu’s race furiously rejoined in a 
deep voice: — (273) 


“Listen, O Visvamitra: this boy is stupid and perverse. He is in the grip of death 
himself and will bring destruction on his whole family. A dark spot on the moon-like solar 
race, he is utterly unruly, senseless and reckless. The very next moment he shall find 
himself in the jaws of death; I proclaim it at the top of my voice and none should blame 
me for it. Forbid him if you would save him, telling him of my glory, might and fury.” Said 
Laksmana, “Holy sir, so long as you live who else can expatiate on your bright glory ? 
With your own lips you have recounted your exploits in diverse ways more than once. 
If you are not yet satisfied, tell us something more; do not undergo a severe trial by 
282 
putting any restraint upon your anger. You have assumed the role of a hero and are 
resolute and imperturbable; it is unbecoming of you to pour abuses. (1 — 4) 
“Heroes perform valiant deeds in fight, but never indulge in self-advertisement. 
Finding before them a foe in battle, it is cowards who boast of their own glory.” (274) 

Chapter 56
“You seem to have Death at your beck and call and summon him again and 
again for my sake!” Hearing Laksmana’s harsh words Parasurama closed his hand 
upon his terrible axe. “After this let no one blame me; this sharp-tongued boy deserves 
his death. I have spared him long on account of his being a child; he is now surely 
going to die.” Said Visvamitra, “Pardon his offence; holy men take no notice of the 
merits and demerits of a child.” “Sharp-edged is my axe, while I am pitiless and furious; 
and here stands before me an offender and an enemy of my Guru. Even though he 
gives a retort, I spare his life solely out of regard for you, O Visvamitra. Or else, 
hacking him to pieces with this cruel axe, I would have easily repaid the debt I have 
owed to my Guru.” (1 — 4) 

* BALA-KANDA * 283 


Said Gadhi’s son (Visvamitra) smiling within himself, ’’Everything looks green to the 
sage (Parasurama); it is, however, the steel sword that he is faced with and not with 
sugar extracted from a sugar-cane (that one could easily gulp). It is a pity that he does 
not understand and still persists in his ignorance.* (275) 

Said Laksmana, “Is there anyone, O good sage, who is not aware of your gentle 
disposition, so well known throughout the world? You have fully paid the debt you owed 
to your parents;! the only debt which now remains to be paid by you is the one you owe 
to your Guru, and that has been vexing your mind not a little. It looks as if you had 
incurred the debt on our account; and since a considerable time has now elapsed a 
heavy interest has accumulated thereon. Now you get the creditor here and I will at once 
rapay him from my own purse.” Hearing these sarcastic remarks Parasurama grasped 
his axe and the whole assembly cried “Alack ! Alack !!” “ O chief of Bhrgus, you are still 
threatening me with your axe; but I am sparing you only because I hold you to be a 
Brahmana, O enemy of princes. You have never met champions staunch in fight; You 
have grown important in your own little home, O holy Brahmana.” Everyone exclaimed, “This 
is wholly undesirable!” The Lord of Raghus now becked Laksmana to stop. (1 — 4) 

* This has reference to a popular saying “A man who loses his eyesight in the month of Sravana 
(corresponding roughly to August), when the whole landscape is green, visualizes everything as green.” 
Visvamitra thereby suggests that Parasurama was blind so far as the greatness of Sri Rama is concerned and 
imagined that the latter was as easy to handle as the other Ksatriyas whom he could easily vanquish in battle. 
Again there is a pun on the word ‘Khada’ in the original, which means both a sword and sugar. 

t There is a sarcastic allusion here to two notable incidents in Parasurama’s life. We are told in the 
Puranas how Parasurama killed his own mother at the bidding of his father Jamadagni, who had got 
incensed at her returning from a river rather late. Pleased with his obedience Jamadagni insisted on his asking for a boon. At this Parasurama prayed for the restoration of his mother’s life and his prayer was immediately granted. His mother was brought to life again and did not even remember the cruel act of her son. On another occasion, Parasurama’s father Jamadagni was slain by the followers of king Sahasrabahu in order to avenge themselves of their leader’s death at Parasurama’s hands and the latter retaliated by extirpating not only the descendants of Sahasrarjuna but the whole Ksatriya race gradually. 




284 


Perceiving the flames of Parasurama’s passion grow with the pouring of oblation 
in the form of Laksmana’s rejoinder, the Sun of Raghu’s race spoke words like 
water. (276) 

“My Lord, have compassion on a child; and wreak not your wrath on this guileless 
youngster (lit., who has the mother’s milk still on its lips). If he had any idea of your might, 
how could he be so foolish as to affront you? If children play some pranks, their teacher 
and parents are in raptures at it; therefore, take pity on him, knowing him to be a child and 
your servant. For you are an even-minded, good-tempered, forbearing and illumined anchorite.” 
On hearing Sri Rama’s words Parasurama cooled down a little; but uttering something 
Laksmana smiled again. Seeing him smile, Parasurama flushed all over with rage and 
said,” Rama, your brother is too wicked. Though fair of hue, he is black at heart; he has deadly 
poison, and not the mother’s milk on his lips. Perverse by nature, he does not take after you, 
nor does this vile imp regard me as the very image of Death.” (1 — 4) 

Laksmana smilingly said, “Listen, holy sir: passion is the root of sin. Swayed by 
it men perpetrate unseemly acts and indulge in misanthropic activities.” (277) 




BALA-KANDA 


285 
“I am your servant, O Chief of sages; put away your wrath and show mercy upon me. 
Anger will not mend the broken bow. Pray sit down; your legs must be aching. If you are very 
fond of it, let us devise some means to mend it by calling in some expert.” Janaka was 
frightened at Laksmana’s words and said, “Pray be quiet; it is not good to transgress the limits 
of propriety.” The people of the city trembled like aspen leaves; they said to themselves.” The 
younger prince is really very naughty.” As the chief of Bhrgus heard the fearless words of 
Laksmana, his whole body burnt with rage and his strength diminished. In a condescending 
manner he said to Rama, “I am sparing the boy because I know he is your younger brother. 
So fair without and foul within, he resembles a jar of gold full of poison.” (1 — 4) 

At this Laksmana laughed again, but Sri Rama cast an angry look on him. Therefore, 
putting away all petulance of speech he submissively went up to his Guru. (278) 


286 



Joining both His palms together and speaking in most humble, gentle and placid 
tones Sri Rama said, “I pray you, my lord: wise as you are by nature, pay no heed to 
the words of a child. A wasp and a child have alike disposition; saints never find fault 
with them. Besides, the boy has done you no harm; it is I, my lord, who have offended 
you. Therefore, your reverence, deal to me as your servant whatever you please, 
whether it be a favour or frown, death or captivity. Tell me quickly the means, O chief 
of sages, by which your anger may be appeased; I shall do accordingly.” Said the sage, 
“How can my passion be pacified, O Rama, when your younger brother is still looking 
mischievously at me. So long as I do not cut his throat with my axe, my wrath is 
ineffectual.” (1 — 4) 

“At the very news of the cruel doings of my axe the consorts of kings miscarry. 
To think that having the same axe still at my service I should see this princeling, my 
enemy, alive !” (279) 

BALA-KANDA 


287 

“My hand moves not, though passion consumes my breast; while this axe, which 
has slain kings without number, has gone blunt. Fate has turned against me; that is why 
I find my nature changed. Otherwise compassion at any time is unknown to my heart. 
My tenderness of feeling has imposed on me a severe strain today.” On hearing this the 
son of Sumitra bowed his head with a smile. “The breeze of your benevolence is so 
befitting your frame; the words you speak appear as though blossoms drop from a tree. 
O reverend sir, when compassion sets your whole frame on fire, God help you when you 
are angry.” “Look here, Janaka, this stupid boy in his perversity intends to migrate to the 
region of Death. Why not put him out of my sight ? Though small to look at, the princeling 
is yet so wicked !” Laksmana smilingly said to himself, “Shut your eyes and the whole 
world will vanish out of your sight.” (1 — 4) 


Then Parasurama spoke to Rama, his heart boiling with rage, “Having broken 
Sambhu’s bow, O wretch, do you now teach me?” (280) 
 “It is with your connivance that your brother addresses such pungent words to me; 
while you make false entreaties with joined palms. Either give me satisfaction in combat, 
or forswear your name of ‘Rama’. Give battle to me. O enemy of Siva, without taking 




288 


recourse to any wily trick; or else I will despatch you and your brother both.” While the 
chief of Bhrgus thus raved with his axe raised on high, Sri Rama smiled within Himself, 
bowing His head to the sage, “While the fault is Laksmana’s, the sage’s wrath is against 
me. Sometimes meekness too begets much evil. A crooked man is reverenced by all; 
the crescent moon is not devoured by the demon Rahu.” Said Rama, “Cease from wrath, 
O lord of sages; the axe is in your hand, while my head is before you. Do that, my lord, 
which may pacify your anger; know me to be your servant.” (1 — 4) 

“How can there be any duel between a master and his servant? Give up your 
anger, O great Brahmana; it is only because he saw you in the garb of a warrior that the boy said something to you and he cannot be blamed for it.” (281) 

“Seeing you equipped with an axe, arrows and bow, the boy took you for a champion 
and got excited. Although he knew you by name, he did not recognize you in person and 
answered you according to his lineage. If you had come as a sage, the child, O holy sir, 
would have placed the dust of your feet on his head. Forgive the error of one who did not 
know you; a Brahmana should have plenty of mercy in his heart. What comparison, my 
lord, can there be between you and me? Tell me if there is any affinity between the head 
and feet. Mine is a small name consisting of the single word ‘Rama’; where as yours is a 
long one, having the word ‘Parasu’ prefined to ‘Rama’. O lord, whereas there is only one 
merit in me and that is my bow while you have got nine most auspicious characteristics 
such as; tranquillity, restraint, penance, purity, forbearance, straight forwardness, knowledge, 
supreme knowledge and faith in God. I am thus inferior to you in everyway; therefore, O 
holy sir, forgive my faults.” (1 — 4) 




BALA-KANDA 


289 


Again and again did Rama address His namesake as a sage and as a great 
Brahmana, till the chief of Bhrgus exclaimed in his fury, “You are as perverse as your 
younger brother!” (282) 

“You know me to be a mere Brahmana; I tell you what kind of a Brahmana I am. 
Know that the bow is my sacrificial ladle, the arrows my oblation and my wrath the blazing 
fire; the brilliant fourfold forces (consisting of the horse, the elephant, the chariots and foot- 
soldiers) are the fuel; and mighty princes have served as victims, whom I have cut to 
pieces with this very axe and offered as sacrifice. In this way I have performed millions of 
sacrifices in the shape of armed conflicts, accompanied by the muttering of sacred formulas 
in the shape of war-cries. My glory is not known to you; that is why you address me in 
contemptuous terms mistaking me for a mere Brahmana. Since you have broken the bow, 
your arrogance has transgressed all limits; in your self-esteem you stand as if you have 
conquered the whole world.” Said Rama, “O sage, think before you speak; your anger is 
out of all proportions with my error, which is a trifling one. Worn out as it was, the bow broke 
at my mere touch. What reason have I to be proud?” (1 — 4) 

“Hear the truth, O lord of the Bhrgus; if, as you say, I treat you with disrespect 




290 


because you are a Brahmana, who is that gallant warrior in this world to whom I would 
bow my head out of fear?” (283) 

“A god, a demon, a king or a body of warriors, whether My equal in strength or 
more powerful than myself — should any of these challenge me to combat, I would 
gladly fight with him, no matter if it is Death himself. For he who is born as a Ksatriya, 
and is yet afraid of fighting, is a veritable wretch and has brought a slur on his lineage. 
I tell you in my natural way and not by way of a tribute to my race: Raghu’s 
descendants are not afraid of even death in battle. Such is the glory of the Brahmana 
race that he who is afraid of you (Brahmanas) is rid of all fear.” When he heard these 
soft yet profound words of Sri Rama, Parasurama’s mind was disillusioned. “O Rama, 
take this bow of Rama’s lord and draw it, so that my doubts may be cleared.”* As 
Parasurama offered his bow it passed into Rama’s hands of its own accord, and 
Parasurama felt amazed at this. (1 — 4) 

He then recognized Sri Rama’s might and his whole frame was thrilled with joy and 
his hair stood on end. Joining his palms together he addressed the following words to 
Sri Rama, his heart bursting with emotion: — (284) 

* Parasurama had got this bow from God Visnu Himself, who had told that when the Lord descended 
on the earth in the form of Sri Rama, his own life’s work would have ended and the bow would pass into the hands of Sri Rama. 




BALA-KANDA 


291 



“Glory to Sri Rama, who delights Raghu’s line even as the sun delights a cluster 
of lotuses ! Glory to the Fire that consumes the forest of the demon race ! Glory to the 
Benefactor of gods, Brahmanas and cows ! Glory to Him who takes away pride, 
ignorance, passion and delusion ! Glory to Him who is an ocean of humility, amiability, 
compassion and goodness and a pastmaster in the art of speech. Glory to the 
Delighter of His servants and to Him who is graceful of every limb and whose form 
possesses the beauty of millions of Cupids ! How can I with one tongue utter Your 
praises? Glory to Him who sports in the mind of the great Lord Siva as a swan in the 
Manasarovara lake ! In my ignorance I have said much that was unseemly; therefore 
pardon me, both brothers, abodes of forgiveness that You are. Glory, glory, all glory 
to the Chief of Raghu’s race !” So saying, the lord of Bhrgus withdrew to the forest to 
practise penance. The wicked kings were all seized with imaginary fears and the 
cowards quietly fled in all directions. (1 — 4) 

The gods sounded their kettledrums and rained down flowers on the Lord. All the 
people of the city rejoiced and their heart’s agony, born of ignorance, disappeared. (285) 



292 

There was a tumultuous clash of musical instruments and everyone displayed 
charming and auspicious objects. Troops of fair-faced, bright-eyed damsels sang 
melodious songs in chorus, their voice resembling the notes of the cuckoo. Janaka’s joy 
was beyond description, as that of a born beggar who has found a treasure. Sita was 
rid of Her fears and was as glad as a young of a Cakora bird at the rising of the moon. 
Janaka made obeisance before Kausika and said, “It is due to your grace, my lord, that 
Sri Rama has been able to break the bow. I am blessed by the pair of brothers; pray tell 
me now, reverend sir, what it behoves me to do.” Said the sage, “Listen, wise king: the 
marriage depended on the bow, and took place directly the bow broke, as is well-known 
to all, including gods, human beings and Nagas.” (1 — 4) 

“Nevertheless you now go and perform according to the family usage whatever 
practices are prescribed in the Veda, after consulting the Brahmanas, the elders of your 
family, and your own preceptor (Satananda).” (286) 




BALA-KANDA 


293 

“Go and despatch to the city of Ayodhya messengers who may invite King 
Dasaratha and bring him here.” Janaka gladly responded, “Very well, gracious sir,” and 
summoning the messengers despatched them that very moment. He then summoned the 
leading citizens, and they all came and respectfully bowed their head. “Decorate the 
bazars, streets, houses, temples and the whole city on all its four sides,” was the royal 
command. They returned in joy, each to his own house. The king then sent for his own 
servants and instructed them: “Erect pavilions of all kinds with due care.” Bowing to the 
king’s orders they returned glad of heart, and sent for a number of clever artisans skilled 
in erecting pavilions. Invoking Brahma they set to work and made pillars of gold in the 
shape of plantain trees — (1 — 4) 
— With leaves and fruits of emeralds and blossoms of rubies; seeing this most 
marvellous specimen of art the Creator himself was lost in bewilderment. (287) 
The bamboo sticks were made of emeralds; they were so straight and knotted 
that they could not be distinguished from real ones. Creepers known by the name 
of Piper-betle (the leaves of which are chewed in India with areca-nut parings) were 
artistically fashioned in gold and looked so charming with their leaves that they could 




294  


not be marked as artificial. These creepers were intertwined into so many cords (for 
holding the bamboos together) with beautiful strings of pearls inserted here and 

there. After much cutting, carving and inlaying they made lotuses of rubies, emeralds, 
diamonds and turquoises. They also fashioned bees and birds of varied plumage, which 
buzzed and whistled in the restling breeze. On the pillars they sculptured images 
of gods, all standing with articles of good omen in their hands. Squares were drawn 
on the floor in various naturally charming devices and filled in with elephant pearls. 
(1-4) 

They made most lovely mango-leaves of graven sapphires with blossoms of gold 
and bunches of emerald fruits glistening on silken cords. (288) 
 
They further made charming and excellent festoons, which looked like so many 
nooses prepared as it were by Cupid. They also put up many auspicious vases as well 
as beautiful flags and banners, curtains and chowries. The marvellous pavilion with a 
number of beautiful lamps consisting of brilliant gems was beyond description. What 
poet has the wit wherewith to describe the pavilion which is going to shelter Videha’s 
Daughter as the bride? The canopy which is going to hold Sri Rama, the ocean of beauty 
and perfection, as the bridegroom, must be the glory of all the three worlds. The 
splendour that belonged to King Janaka’s palace was to be seen in every house of that 
city; to him who beheld Tirahuta (Janaka’s capital) during that time, all the fourteen  spheres* appeared of small account. The prosperity that reigned in the house of the 
humblest citizen was enough to fascinate even the lord of celestials. (1 — 4) 

The magnificence of the city wherein dwelt Goddess Laksmi in the charming 
disguise of a mortal woman made even Sarada (the goddess of eloquence) and (the 
thousand-tongued) Sesa falter in describing it. (289) 

Chapter 57

Janaka’s messengers arrived at Sri Rama’s sacred birth-place and rejoiced to 
behold the charming city. They sent in word at the entrance of the royal palace; hearing 
of their arrival King Dasaratha summoned them to his presence. With due reverence they 
delivered the letter; and the king in his joy rose to receive it in person. As he read the 
letter, tears rushed to his eyes; the hair on his body stood erect and his heart was full. 
With Rama and Laksmana in his heart and the valuable letter in his hand, he remained 
mute and could not utter a word, either good or bad. Then recovering himself, he read 
out the letter, and the court rejoiced to hear the authentic news. Obtaining the news at 
the very spot where he had been playing about, Bharata came with his playmates and 
brother (Satrughna), and with the utmost modesty and affection asked, “Father, where has 
the letter come from?” (1 — 4) 


* According to Hindu scriptures the universe is divided into fourteen spheres, seven higher and seven 
lower. In their ascending order the seven higher spheres are named as Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah, Mahah, Janah, Tapah and Satyam; while the lower seven are in their descending order named as Atala, Vitala, Sutala,Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala. 




296 

“Are my two beloved brothers doing well and in what land do they happen to be ?” 
On hearing these words steeped in love the king read the letter over again. (290) 

On hearing the letter the two brothers experienced a thrill of joy; their whole frame 
was bursting with an excess of emotion. The whole court was particularly delighted to see 
Bharata’s unalloyed love. The king then seated the messengers close by him and spoke 
to them in sweet and winning tones: “Tell me, friends, are the two boys well? Have you 
seen them well with your own eyes? The one dark and the other fair of hue, they are 
equipped with bow and quiver and are of tender age and accompanied by the sage Kausika. 
Do you recognize them? If so, tell me something about their temperament.” Overwhelmed 
with love the king asked thus again and again. “From the day the sage took them away it 
is only today that I have obtained authentic news about them. Tell me how King Videha was 
able to know them.” At these fond words the messengers smiled. (1 — 4) 

“Listen, O crest-jewel of kings: there is no one so blessed as you, who have for 
your sons Rama and Laksmana, the two ornaments of the universe.” (291) 




BALA-KANDA 


297 
“No enquiry is needed in respect of your sons, who are lions among men and the 
light of the universe, and before whose renown and glory the moon looks dim and the 
sun appears cool. About them, my lord, you ask how they came to be recognized ! Does 
one take a lamp in one’s hand to see the sun ? On the occasion of Slta’s self-election 
of her husband had assembled numerous princes, each one of whom was a greater 
champion than the rest; but not one of them could stir Sambhu’s bow and all the mighty 
heroes failed. The might of all those who were proud of their valour in the three worlds 
was crushed by it. Even the demon Bana, who could lift Mount Meru, lost heart and 
retired after pacing round the bow; and even he (Ravana) who had lifted up Mount 
Kailasa (the abode of Siva) in mere sport was worsted in that assembly.” (1 — 4) 

“On that occasion, we submit, O great king, Sri Rama’ the jewel of Raghu’s race, 
snapped the bow without the least exertion even as an elephant would break the stalk 
of a lotus.” (292) 




298 

“Hearing the news the chief of Bhrgus came in a fury and indulged in much brow- 
beating. But seeing Sri Rama’s strength he handed his bow to the latter and after much 
supplication withdrew to the woods. Even as Rama, O king, is unequalled in strength, 
Laksmana too is a mine of glory, at whose very sight the kings trembled as elephants 
at the gaze of a young lion. Now that we have seen your two sons, my lord, no one 
catches our eye any longer.” The messengers’ eloquent speech, which was full of love, 
glorifying and expressive of the heroic sentiment, attracted all. The king and his whole 
court were overwhelmed with emotion and began to offer lavish gifts to the messengers. 
They, however, closed their ears in protest crying, “This is ethical !” Everyone was 
delighted to note their sense of propriety.* (1 — 4) 

The king then rose going up to Vasistha, gave the letter to him, and sending for 
the messengers with due courtesy related the whole story to his preceptor. (293) 

* In India not only the blood relations but even servants and co-villagers of a bride consider it sinful to accept even food or water, much less any gift or present, from the house of the bridegroom; for it is customary in this country to give the hand of a girl as a sacred gift and one is naturally reluctant to accept anything in return from him on whom a gift is made. This kind of sentiment prevails even in those cases where a marriage alliance has only been stipulated and not yet brought into actual effect. The messengers, in the above context, are actuated with a similar sentiment in refusing the gifts offered to them by King Dasaratha, who happened to be the father of the champion who had won the hand of Princess JanakT, their master’s daughter. 




BALA-KANDA 


299 

The Guru was highly pleased to hear the news and said, “To a virtuous man 
the world abounds in happiness. As rivers run into the sea, although the latter has 
no craving for them, so joy and prosperity come unasked and of their own accord 
to a pious soul. Just as you are given to the service of your preceptor, the Brahmanas 
and cows as well as of gods, Queen Kausalya is no less devout than you. A pious 
soul like you there has never been, nor is, nor shall be in this world. Who can be 
more blessed than you, O king, who have a son like Rama, and whose four worthy 
children are all valiant, submissive, true to their vow of piety and oceans of goodness. 
You are blessed indeed for all time; now, prepare the marriage procession to the sound 
of kettledrums. (1 — 4) 

“And proceed quickly.” On hearing these words of the preceptor the king bowed 
his head and said, “Very well, my lord!” and after assigning lodgings to the messengers 
returned to his palace. (294) 



300 


The king then called all the ladies of the gynaeceum and read aloud Janaka’s letter 
to them. All rejoiced to hear the message and the king himself related the other tidings 
which he had heard from the lips of the messengers. Bursting with emotion the queens 
shone like pea-hens rejoicing at the rumbling of clouds. The preceptor’s wife and the 
wives of other elders in their joy invoked the blessings of heaven and the mothers of the 
four brothers were overwhelmed with ecstasy. They took the most beloved letter from 
each other and pressing it to their bosom cooled their burning heart. The great king 
recounted again and again the glory and exploits of both Rama and Laksmana, saying 
that it was all due to the sage’s grace he went out of doors. The queens then sent for 
the Brahmanas and joyfully bestowed gifts on them. And the Brahmanas returned to 
their home uttering blessings. (1 — 4)  

Next they called the beggars and lavished innumerable kinds of gifts on them. 
“Long live the four sons of Emperor Dasaratha!” (295) 
Thus they shouted as they left, attired in raiment of various kinds; there was a 
jubilant and tempestuous clash of kettledrums. When the news spread among all the 
people, festivities were started in every house. All the fourteen spheres were filled with 
joy at the news of the forthcoming wedding of Janaka’s daughter with the hero of 
Raghu’s race. The citizens were enraptured to hear the glad tidings and began to 
decorate the streets, houses and lanes. Although the city of Ayodhya is ever charming, 
being the blessed and sacred abode of Sri Rama, it was adorned with beautiful festal 
decorations because of the love the people bore towards the very embodiment of love. 
Flags and banners, curtains and graceful chowries canopied the bazars in a most 
marvellous fashion. With vases of gold, festal arches, festoons of netted gems, turmeric, 
blades of Durva grass, curds, unbroken rice and wreaths of flowers — (1 — 4) 




BALA-KANDA 


301 

— The people decorated their respective houses, which were already full of 
blessings; the lanes were sprinkled over with water, mixed with the fourfold pastes of 
sandal, saffron, musk and camphor and the squares in front of their houses were filled 
in with tasteful designs. (296) 

Collected here and there troops of ladies, all brilliant as the lightning, with moon-like 
face and eyes resembling those of a fawn and beauty enough to rob Love’s consort (Rati) 
of her pride, and who had practised all the sixteen kinds of female adornment* sang 
auspicious strains with voice so melodious that the female cuckoo was put to shame on 
hearing the sweet sound ! How is the king’s palace to be described; the pavilion set up 
there would dazzle the whole universe. Various articles of good omen and charming in 
appearance were displayed and a number of kettledrums were sounded. Here were 
panegyrists singing the family glory and here were Brahmanas chanting the Vedas; while 
pretty women carolled festive songs, many times repeating the names of Rama and STta. 


* According to the standard works on poetics the sixteen forms of female adornment are as follows: — 
(1) rubbing and cleansing the body with fragrant unguents, (2) ablution, (3) putting on a new attire, (4) dyeing the sides of one’s feet with red lag, (5) dressing the hair, (6) adorning the parting line of the hair with red lead, (7) painting the forehead with streaks of sandal-paste, (8) dotting the chin with a small black spot, (9) colouring the palms of one’s hands and the soles of one’s feet with the reddish dye extracted from the leaves of the MehadT plant, (10) an inting one’s body with perfumed unguents, (11) adorning the body with bejewelled ornaments, (12) beautifying the hair etc., with wreaths of flowers, (13) perfuming and dyeing one’s mouth by chewing betel-leaves etc., (14) colouring the teeth, (15) painting the lips and (16) applying collyrium to one’s eyes. 




302 


There was an excess of joy all round, while the palace was too small to contain it; it 
seemed, therefore, as if it overflowed on all sides. (1 — 4) 

What poet can describe the splendour of Dasaratha’s palace in which Rama, the 
crest-jewel of all divinities, had taken birth? (297) 

Chapter 58

The king next called Bharata and said, “Go and prepare the horses, elephants and 
chariots and start at once in procession for Rama’s marriage.” The two brothers were 
thrilled to hear this command. Bharata sent for the officers in charge of the stables and 
issued necessary instructions; the latter rose in joy and hastened to execute the orders. 
They equipped the horses with gorgeous saddles; gallant steeds of different colours 
stood there in their majesty. They were all beautiful and surpassingly swift-footed; they 
trod the ground as lightly as though it were red-hot iron. They belonged to different 
breeds, which were more than one could tell; they would fly in the air, as it were, 
outstripping the wind itself. Gallant princes, who were of the same age as Bharata, 
mounted them. The princes were all handsome and adorned with jewels and had a bow 
and arrow in their hands and a well-equipped quiver fastened at their side. (1 — 4) 

They were elegant blithesome youths, chosen and skilled warriors all; and with 
each knight were two footmen, clever at sword-play. (298) 




BALA-KANDA 


303 

The champions, who were all great fighters and had taken a vow of chivalry, sallied 
forth and halted outside the city. The clever fellows put their steeds through various paces 
and rejoiced to hear the clash of tabor and drum. The charioteers had made their cars 
equally gorgeous with flags and banners, gems and ornaments. They were also provided 
with elegant chowries and tinkling bells, and outdid in splendour the chariot of the sun- 
god. The king owned numberless horses with dark ears,* which the charioteers yoked to 
their chariots. They were all beautiful and looked so charming with their ornaments that 
even sages would be enraptured at the sight. They skimmed the surface of water even 
as dry land and would not sink even hoof-deep; so marvellous was their speed. Having 
provided the chariots with missiles and weapons and every other equipment the 
charioteers called their masters. (1 — 4) 

Mounting the chariots the processionists began to collect outside the city. On 
whatever errand one went, each was greeted by auspicious omens. (299) 

* A rare and invaluable breed of horses, milk white all over and dark only in the ears, which were 
considered specially suitable for a horse-sacrifice. 




304 

On magnificent elephants were mounted splendid seats with canopies wrought in 
a manner beyond all description. Elephants in rut, adorned with clanging bells, headed 
like beautiful (rumbling) clouds in the rainy month of Sravana (roughly corresponding to 
August). There were various kinds of other vehicles, such as charming palanquins, 
sedans etc., on which rode companies of noble Brahmanas, incarnations, as it were, of 
all the hymns of the Vedas. Genealogists, bards, panegyrists and rhapsodists too rode 
on vehicles appropriate to their respective rank; while mules, camels and oxen of various 
breeds carried on their backs commodities of innumerable kinds. Millions of porters 
marched with burdens slung across their shoulders; who could enumerate the varieties 
of goods they carried? Crowds of servants also proceeded on the journey equipping 
themselves in their own way and forming batches of their own. (1 — 4) 

Each had boundless joy in his heart and a thrill ran through the bodies of all. They 
whispered to one another, “When shall we feast our eyes on the two heroes, Rama 
and Laksmana?” (300) 




BALA-KANDA 


305 
 


The elephants trumpeted and their bells clanged with a terrific din; on all sides there 
was a creaking of wheels and a neighing of horses. The clash of kettledrums would drown 
the peal of thunder; no one could hear one’s own words, much less of others. At the 
entrance of the king’s palace, there was such an enormous crowd that a stone thrown 
there would be trodden into dust. Women viewed the sight from house-tops, carrying festal 
lights in salvers used on auspicious occasions, and carolled melodious strains of various 
kinds in an ecstasy of joy beyond description. Then Sumantra (King Dasaratha’s own 
charioteer and trusted counsellor) got ready a pair of chariots and yoked them with steeds 
that would outrun even the horses of the sun-god, and brought them in all their splendour 
before the king; their beauty was more than goddess Sarada could describe. One of them 
was equipped with the royal paraphernalia while the other was a mass of splendour and 
shone brightly. (1 — 4) 

This magnificent chariot the king joyfully caused Vasistha to mount, and then 
himself ascended the other, with his thoughts fixed on Lord Hara, his preceptor 
(Vasistha), goddess Gauri and the god Ganesa. (301) 


306 



In the company of Vasistha the king shone forth as Indra (the lord of celestials) by 
the side of his preceptor (Brhaspati). After performing all the rites sanctioned by family 
usage or prescribed by the Vedas and seeing everyone fully equipped for the journey, 
he sallied forth to the blast of the conch-shell after receiving the permission of his 
preceptor and with his thoughts fixed on Sri Rama. The immortals rejoiced to see the 
marriage procession and rained down flowers full of auspicious blessings. There was a 
confused din of horses neighing, elephants trumpeting and music playing both in the 
heavens and in the procession. Human and celestial dames alike sang festal melodies, 
while clarionets played in sweet accord. There was an indescribable clamour of bells, 
both large and small. The footmen leaped and danced, displaying exercises of various 
kinds. Jesters, proficient in pleasantry and expert in singing melodious songs, practised 
all kinds of buffoonery. (1 — 4) 
Gallant princes made their steeds cruvet to the measured beat of tabors and 
kettledrums; accomplished dancers noted with surprise that they never made a step out 
of time. (302) 
The splendour of the marriage procession was more than one could describe. Fair 
and auspicious omens occurred. The blue-necked jay picked up food on the left and 
announced as it were all good fortune. On a fair field in the right appeared a cow, and a 
mongoose was seen by all. A soft, cool and fragrant breeze was blowing in a favourable 
direction; a blessed (unwidowed) woman appeared with a pitcher and a child in her arms. A 
fox turned round and showed himself again and again and a cow suckled its calf in front of 




BALA-KANDA 


307 


the procession; a herd of deer came round to the right, as if good omens appeared in visible 
form. A Brahmani-kite promised great blessings; and a Syama bird was observed on an 
auspicious tree to the left. A man bearing curds and fish and two learned Brahmanas each 
with a book in his hand came from the opposite direction. (1 — 4) 



Do.; marhgalamaya kalyanamaya abhimata phala datara, 
janu saba sace hona hita bhae saguna eka bara. 303. 

All kinds of blessed and auspicious omens and those conducive of desired results 
occurred all at once as if to fulfil themselves. (303) 

Auspicious omens easily occur to him who has God with form as his own son. In 
the marriage which was going to take place, the bridegroom was no other than Sri Rama 
and Sita Herself was the bride; while the pious Dasaratha and Janaka were the parents 
of the bridegroom and the bride respectively; hearing of this marriage all good omens 
danced and said, “It is now that the Creator has justified us.” In this way the procession 
set forth amidst the neighing of horses, the trumpeting of elephants and the clash of 
kettledrums. Learning that the chief of the solar race, King Dasaratha, was already on 
the way, King Janaka had the rivers bridged, and got beautiful rest-houses erected at 
different stages, which vied in magnificence with the city of immortals (Amaravati), and 
in which members of the bridegroom’s party were supplied with excellent food, beds and 
clothing each according to his own taste. Finding ever new pleasures agreeable to 
themselves all the members of the bridegroom’s party forgot their own home. (1 — 4) 




308 


When it was learnt that the procession of the bridegroom’s party was approaching 
and the tempestuous clash of the kettledrums was heard, a deputation went out to 
receive it with elephants, chariots, footmen and horses duly equipped. (304) 

Jars of gold full of sweet and cold drinks and trays and salvers and beautiful dishes 
of various kinds laden with confections of indescribable variety and delicious as ambrosia, 
with luscious fruit and many other delightful articles were sent as an offering by King 
Janaka in his joy. The king also sent ornaments, wearing apparel, valuable gems of every 
variety, birds, antelopes, horses, elephants, vehicles of every description, charming 
aromatic substances of an auspicious nature and various articles of good omen; and a 
train of porters marched with their loads of curds, parched rice and presents of endless 
variety slung across their shoulders. When the deputation saw the bridegroom’s party, 
their mind was filled with rapture and a thrill ran through their frame. Seeing the deputation 
equipped in everyway the members of the bridegroom’s party had their drums beaten in 
great joy. (1 — 4) 

A batch from each side joyfully marched at a gallop in order to meet each other and 
the two parties met as two oceans of bliss that had transgressed their bounds. (305) 




BALA-KANDA 


309 
Celestial damsels rained down flowers and sang, while the glad gods sounded 
kettledrums. The members of the deputation placed all the offerings before King 
Dasaratha and supplicated him with an affectionate address. The king lovingly accepted 
everything and distributed the offerings as presents among his own people, or 
bestowed them as alms on the beggars. After due homage, reverence and courtesy 
the deputation conducted the bridegroom’s party to the lodgings set apart for them. 
Gorgeous cloths were spread as carpets for the royal guests to tread upon, on seeing 
which Kubera (the god of wealth) was no longer proud of his wealth. Magnificent were 
the quarters assigned to the bridegroom’s party, which provided every kind of comfort 
for each guest. When Sita learnt that the bridegroom’s party had arrived in the city, She 
manifested Her glory to a certain extent. By Her very thought She summoned all the 
Siddhis (miraculous powers personified) and despatched them to wait upon the king 
and his party. (1 — 4) 

Hearing Sita’s command they repaired to the guests’ apartments, taking with them 
every kind of riches, comforts as well as the enjoyments and luxuries of heaven. (306)  




310 


Each member of the bridegroom’s party found in his own apartment all the 
enjoyments of heaven ready at hand in everyway. No one, however, had an inkling of 
the mystery behind this untold splendour; everyone sang Janaka’s praises. Rama alone 
recognized Sita’s influence and was glad at heart to discern Her love . When the two 
brothers heard of their father’s arrival, they could not contain themselves for joy, but were 
too modest to speak to their Guru, though their heart longed to see their sire. Visvamitra 
felt much gratified at heart to perceive this great humility. In his joy he pressed the two 
brothers to his bosom; a thrill ran through his limbs, while tears rushed to his eyes. They 
proceeded to the guests’ apartments, where King Dasaratha was, as though a lake 
sought to visit a thirsty soul. (1 — 4) 

When the king saw the sage coming with the two princes, he rose in joy and 
advanced to meet them like a man who feels his footing in an ocean of bliss. (307) 




BALA-KANDA 


311 

The king prostrated himself before the sage, placing the dust of the latter’s feet on 
his head again and again. Kausika pressed the king to his bosom, blessed him and 
inquired after his welfare. When King Dasaratha saw the two brothers prostrating 
themselves, he could not contain himself for joy. Pressing the boys to his bosom he 
allayed the unbearable pangs of separation and looked like a dead body restored to life. 
Rama and Laksmana then bowed their head at Vasistha’s feet and the great sage 
embraced them in the ecstasy of love. The two brothers next saluted all the Brahmanas 
and in turn received their welcome blessings. Bharata and his younger half-brother 
(Satrughna) greeted Rama, who lifted them and embraced them. Laksmana rejoiced to 
see the two brothers (Bharata and Satrughna) and as he embraced them his limbs were 
throbbing with emotion. (1 — 4) 
The most gracious and unassuming Lord greeted everyone else including the 
citizens, attendants, kinsmen, beggars, ministers and friends in a manner befitting the 
rank of each. (308) 

The sight of Sri Rama was so soothing to the guests; the ways of love are beyond 
description. Beside the king his four sons looked like incarnations as it were, of the four 




312 

ends of human endeavour, viz., riches, religious merit etc. The people of the city were 
delighted beyond measure to see King Dasaratha with his sons. The gods rained down 
flowers and beat their drums; the nymphs of heaven danced and sang. Satananda (King 
Janaka’s family preceptor) and the other Brahmanas and ministers of State, as well as 
the genealogists, minstrels, jesters and rhapsodists, who formed the deputation, paid due 
honour to the king and his party and returned with their permission. The bridegroom’s 
party had arrived earlier than the day fixed for the wedding: there was great rejoicing in 
the city on this account . Everyone enjoyed transcendent bliss and prayed to the Creator 
that the days and nights might be lengthened. (1 — 4) 

“Rama and Sita are the perfection of beauty, and the two kings (Dasaratha and 
Janaka) the perfection of virtue!” Thus would observe the men and women of the city 
wherever they happened to meet”. (309) 

“Vaidehi (Sita) is the incarnation of Janaka’s merit, and Rama is Dasaratha’s 
virtue personified. No one has worshipped Siva with such devotion as these two kings, 
nor has anyone obtained such a reward as they have. No one has equalled them in 
this world, nor is there anyone to equal them anywhere nor shall be. We are all 
storehouses of all kinds of merits in that we have been born in this world as residents 
of Janaka’s capital. Who is so highly blessed as we, who have beheld the beauty of 
Janaki (Sita) and Rama? And we will witness Sri Rama’s wedding and shall thereby 
richly reap the benefit of havingour eyes.” Damsels with voice as sweet as the notes 
of the cuckoo whispered to one another, “O bright-eyed friends, we shall gain much by 




BALA-KANDA 


313 


this union. By our great good-luck Providence has ordained things well: the two brothers 
shall often delight our eyes.” (1 — 4) 

“Time after time out of affection Janaka will send for Sita (from Ayodhya); and 


the two brothers, charming as millions 
her back.” 
of Cupids put together, will come to take 

(310) 

“There will be hospitality of every kind; who, dear one, would not love to stay at 
such a father-in-law’s. On each such occasion all the people of the city will be happy to 
behold Sri Rama and Laksmana. King Dasaratha, my friends, has brought with him two 
other lads exactly resembling the pair of Rama and Laksmana. One dark, the other fair, 
but both charming of every limb: so declare all those who have seen them.” Said another, 
“I saw them today: it appeared to me as though the Creator had fashioned them with his 
own hands. Bharata is an exact copy of Rama; no man or woman could distinguish them 
at first sight. Laksmana and Satrusudana (Satrughna) are indistinguishable from each 
other, peerless in every limb from head to foot. The four brothers attract the mind but 
cannot be described in words; for they have no match in all the three worlds.” (1 — 4) 




314 

Says Tulasldasa: “They have no comparison anywhere, so declare the poets and 
wise men. Oceans of strength, modesty, learning, amiability and beauty, they are their 
own Compeers.” Spreading out the skirt of their garment (as a beggar would while asking 
for alms) all the women of the city made entreaties to the Creator, “May all the four 
brothers be married in this city and may we sing charming nuptial songs!” 

Said the damsels to one another, with tears in their eyes and the hair on their body 
standing erect, “Friends, the Slayer of the demon Tripura will accomplish everything: the 
two kings are of such boundless merit.” (311) 
In this way they all prayed and a flood of joy inundated their heart. The princes 
who had come thus some days rejoiced to see the four brothers and returned each to his 
own home extolling Sri Rama’s widespread and spotless fame. Thus a few days elapsed 
to the delight alike of the citizens and all the members of the bridegroom’s party. At length 
the blessed day of wedding arrived; it was the delightful month of Margasirsa and the 
beginning of the cold season. Having carefully examined and determined the propitious 
nature of the planets, date, asterism, the conjunction of the stars, the day of the week 
and the hour of the wedding the Creator despatched the note concerning the hour of the 




BALA-KANDA 


315 


The king asked the family priest (Satananda), “What is the cause of delay now?” 
Satananda then summoned the ministers, who came equipped with all auspicious 
articles. A number of conches, drums and tabors sounded. Festal vases and articles of 
good omen (such as curds, turmeric and blades of Durva grass) were displayed. 
Graceful women (whose husbands were alive) sang songs, and holy Brahmanas 
chanted Vedic texts. In this manner they proceeded to invite the bridegroom’s party 
with due honour and called at the latter’s lodgings. When they witnessed King Dasaratha’s 
glory, Indra (the lord of celestials) looked very small to them. “The hour has come; be 
good enough to start now,” they submitted. At this the drums gave a thundering beat. 
After consulting his preceptor and going through the family rites King Dasaratha sallied 
forth with a host of sages and holy men. (1 — 4) 




316 

Witnessing King Dasaratha’s good fortune and glory and believing their birth as 
fruitless, Brahma and the other gods began to extol him with a thousand tongues. (313) 


The gods perceived that it was a fit occasion for happy rejoicings; hence they 
rained down flowers and beat their drums. Siva, Brahma and hosts of other gods 
mounted aerial cars in several groups. Their frames thrilling over with emotion and 
their hearts overflowing with joy they proceeded to witness Sri Rama’s wedding. The 
gods felt so enraptured to see Janaka’s capital that their own realms appeared to 
them as of small account. They gazed with amazement at the wonderful pavilion and 
all the different works of art which were of a transcendental character. The people 
of the city, both men and women, were so many mines of beauty, well-formed, pious, 
amiable and wise. In their presence all the gods and goddesses appeared like stars 
in a moonlit night. The Creator (Brahma) was astounded above all; for nowhere did 
he find his own handiwork. (1 — 4) 

Siva admonished all the gods saying, "Be not lost in wonder; calmly ponder in your 
heart that it is the wedding of Sita and the Hero of Raghu's race." (314) 




BALA-KANDA 


317 

"At the very mention of whose name all evil is uprooted and the four ends of 
human existence are brought within one's grasp, such are Sita and Rama," said the 
Destroyer of Cupid, Sankara. In this way Sambhu admonished the divinities, and then 
spurred on His noble bull. The gods beheld Dasaratha marching (to Janaka's palace) 
with his heart full of rapture and the hair on his body standing erect. The assemblage of 
holy men and Brahmanas accompanying the king appeared like joys incarnate ministering 
to him. By his side shone forth the four handsome princes, incarnations as it were of the 
four types of final beatitude.* The gods were greatly inspired with love to see two lovely 
pairs, one possessing the hue of emeralds and the other of golden hue. They were 
particularly delighted at heart to see Rama; and extolling the king they rained down 
flowers on him. (1 — 4) 
As Uma and the Slayer of the demon Tripura gazed again and again at Sri Rama's 
charming beauty from head to foot, the hair on Their body stood erect and Their eyes 
were bedewed with tears. (315) 


* The four types of final beatitude as enumerated in the scriptures are as follows: — (1) Salokya 
(residence in the same heaven as the Supreme Deity), (2) Sarupya (attaining a form similar to that of 
the Deity), (3) SamTpya (living in close proximity with the Deity), and (4) Sayujya (complete absorption 
into the Deity). 




318 

His swarthy form possessed the glow of a peacock's neck, while His bright yellow 
raiment outshone the lightning. Wedding ornaments of every kind, all auspicious and 
graceful in everyway, adorned His person. His countenance was as delightful as the 
moon in a cloudless autumnal night; while His eyes put to shame a blooming pair of 
lotuses. The elegance of His form was transcendent in all its details; yet enrapturing 
the mind, it defied description. Beside Him shone forth His lovely brothers, who rode 
curveting their restive steed. The other princes too displayed the pace of their horses 
and the family bards recited the glories of their line. Even the king of birds, Garuda, 
blushed for shame to note the speed of the steed that Rama bestrode; it was charming 
beyond description in everyway; it seemed as though Cupid himself had taken the form 
of horse. (1 — 4) 

It seemed as if Cupid himself had appeared with all his charm in the disguise of 
a horse for the sake of Sri Rama and fascinated the whole universe with its youth and 
vigour, form and virtues as well as with its pace. A bejewelled saddle, thick set with 
beautiful pearls, gems and rubies shone on his back; the exquisite band with small 
tinkling bells and the lovely bridle, dazed gods, men and sages alike. 

BALA-KANDA 


319 


Marching with its mind completely merged in the Lord's will, the horse looked most 
beautiful, as though a cloud irradiated by stars and the fitful lightning had mounted a 
peacock and made it dance. (316) 


Even Sarada is unable to describe the noble steed on which Sri Rama rode. 
Sankara (who has five faces, with three eyes each) was enamoured of Sri Rama's 
beauty and congratulated himself on His possessing as many as fifteen eyes. When Sri 
Hari (Visnu) fondly gazed on Rama, both Rama and Her lord were equally enchanted. 
(The four-faced) Brahma too was delighted to behold Sri Rama's beauty; but he felt 
sorry to think that he had only eight eyes. The generalissimo of the heavenly host (the 
six-faced Kartikeya) exulted over the fact of his possessing one and a half as many eyes 
as Brahma. When the wise lord of celestials gazed on Sri Rama (with his thousand 
eyes), he thought Gautama's curse as the greatest blessing. All the gods envied Indra 
and observed, "No one can vie with Purandara (Indra) today." The whole host of 
heavenly beings rejoiced to behold Sri Rama and there was joy beyond measure in the 
court of both the monarchs. (1 — 4) 

320 

There was great rejoicing in the court of both the kings and a tempestuous clash 
of kettledrums on both sides; the gods rained down flowers, shouting in their joy, "Glory, 
glory, glory to the Jewel of Raghu's race!" In this way when it was known that the 
marriage procession was approaching, all sorts of music began to play; while Queen 
Sunayana (Sita's mother) summoned married women whose husbands were alive and 
prepared with their help auspicious materials for the ceremony of waving lights round 
the bridegroom. 

Kindling lights of various kinds and collecting all other articles of good omen, a 
bevy of graceful women, who possessed the charming gait of an elephant, proceeded 
joyfully to perform the ceremony of waving lights round the bridegroom. (317) 

They all had moon-like faces, and eyes like those of a gazelle; by the elegance 
of their form they robbed Rati (Love's consort) of all self-conceit. Attired in costly 
garments of various colours they had adorned their person with all kinds of ornaments. 
They had further beautified all their limbs with auspicious materials, and sang melodies 
that put to shame even a female cuckoo. Bracelets, small bells round their waistband as 
well as anklets made a jingling sound as they moved and even Love's elephants blushed 
for shame to see their gait. All kinds of music played and there were festive axtivt both 
in the heavens and in the city. SacT (Indra's consort), Sarada, Rama, Bhavanl and other 




BALA-KANDA 


321 

goddesses, who were pure-hearted and clever by nature, assumed the disguise of lovely 
women and joined the royal gynaeceum. They sang festal songs in a melodious voice; and 
as everyone was overcome with joy no one could recognize them. (1 — 4) 

Who should recognize whom, when everyone in the gynaeceum proceeded in her 
ecstatic joy to join the ceremony of waving lights round the bridegroom, who was no other 
than the Supreme Spirit incarnate. Melodious songs were being sung and kettledrums 
gently sounded; the gods rained down flowers and everything looked most charming. All 
the women were delighted at heart to behold the bridegroom, who was the fountain of joy; 
tears of love rushed to their lotus-like eyes and the hair on their pretty limbs stood erect. 

The joy which Sita's mother felt in her heart on beholding Sri Rama in the attire 
of a bridegroom was more than a thousand Saradas and Sesas could not tell in a 
hundred Kalpas. (318) 





322 
Restraining her tears out of regard for the auspicious occasion, Queen Sunayana 
performed the ceremony of waving lights with a gladdened heart, and duly completed all 
the rites prescribed by the Vedas as well as by family usage. The five kinds of music* 
were being played, accompanied by five varieties of other soundsf and festal songs; 
carpets of different sorts were spread on the way. After waving lights the queen offered 
water to Sri Rama for washing His hands with and the latter then proceeded to the 
pavilion. Dasaratha shone in all his glory with his followers; his magnificence put to 
shame the guardians of the different worlds. From time to time the gods rained down 
flowers; and the Brahmanas recited propitiatory texts appropriate to the occasion. There 
was such a great uproar in the heavens as well as in the city that no one could hear 
one's own words, much less of others. In this way Sri Rama entered the pavilion; after 
offering Him water to wash His hands with, He was conducted to His seat. (1 — 4) 
 

When Rama was installed on the seat reserved for Him, lights were waved round 
Him and everyone rejoiced to behold the bridegroom, scattering about Him gems and 
raiments and ornaments in profusion; while women sang festal songs. Brahma and the 
other great gods witnessed the spectacle disguised as Brahmanas; and as they gazed 
on the beauty of Sri Rama, who delighted Raghu's race even as the sun brings joy to 
the lotuses, they regarded this privilege as the fulfilment of their life. 


* The five kinds of music referred to above are those produced from: — (1) Vina or the lute, (2) the 
clapping of hands, (3) the clashing of a pair of cymbals, (4) the beating of a kettledrum and (5) the blowing of 
a trumpet of any other wind instrument. 


Having observed every custom that derived its authority from the Vedas or from 
popular tradition the two kings Janaka and Dasaratha, embraced each other with great 
love. The two monarchs while embracing each other presented a glorious spectacle; 
poets made repeated efforts to find a suitable analogy but felt abashed at their failure. 
Finding no comparison anywhere, they felt baffled and concluded that the pair could be 
likened to themselves alone. The gods were enraptured to see the tie of love between 
the two kings embracing each other; raining down flowers they began to sing the glories 
of both. "Ever since Brahma created the world, we have witnessed and heard of many 
a marriage; but it is only today that we have seen the pomp and grandeur on both sides 
so well-balanced in every respect and the fathers of the bride and the bridegroom so well- 
matched." Hearing the above voice from heaven, which was so charming yet so true, there 
was a flood of transcendent love on both sides. Unrolling beautiful carpets on the way 
and offering water to wash his hands with, Janaka himself conducted Dasaratha to the 
pavilion with all honour. (1 — 4) 



324 

The marvellous art of the pavilion and its charm captivated the heart even of 
sages; yet wise Janaka fetched and placed with his own hands thrones for all the 
honoured guests. He worshipped the sage Vasistha as if he were his own family deity 
and supplicating before him, received his blessings; while the supreme devotion with 
which he paid his homage to Kausika was something too great for words. 

King Janaka gladly adored Vamadeva (another family preceptor of King Dasaratha) 
and the other Rsis as well; he gave them all gorgeous seats and received blessings from 
all of them in return. (320) 
 


thereafter he adored the King of Ayodhya, taking him to be the peer of Siva 
and none other; and mentioning how his fortune and rank had been enhanced 
through relation with King Dasaratha, he made humble supplication to the latter and 
extolled him with joined palms. King Janaka worshipped all the members of the 
bridegroom's party with the same honour in every respect as he had paid to the 
bridegroom's father, and assigned appropriate seats to them all. How am I to describe 
with my one tongue the warmth of his feeling? Janaka honoured the whole bridegroom's 
party with gifts, polite behaviour, supplication and sweet words. Brahma, Hari, Hara, the 
guardians of the eight quarters of the world* and the sun-god, all of whom had knowledge 


* The guardians of the eight quarters of the world are: (1) Indra (the lord of celestials), of the east; 
(2) Agni (fire-god), of the south-east; (3) Yama (the god dispensing the fruit of one’s good or evil actions), of the 




BALA-KANDA 


325 


of Sri Rama's glory, disguised themselves as noble Brahmanas and witnessed the 
spectacle with great delight. Janaka worshipped them as on a par with gods and, though 
he recognized them not, assigned them exalted seats. (1 — 4) 

Who should recognize and whom should one know, when everyone had forgotten 
one's own self? As they gazed on the bridegroom, who was Bliss personified, joy was 
diffused on both sides (in the bridegroom's party as well as in the court of Janaka). The 
all-wise Rama recognized the gods, worshipped them mentally and assigned them seats 
of His own fancy. And the immortals were delighted at heart to perceive the congenial 
manners and gentle disposition of the Lord. 


The graceful eyes of all fondly drank in the beauty of Sri Ramacandra's 
countenance with the utmost love and rapture even as the Cakora bird feeds on the 
moon's rays. (321) 


south; (4) Nirrti (the god of death), of the south-west; (5) Varuna (the god of water), of the west; (6) Vayu (the wind- 
god), of the north-west; (7) Kuvera (the god of riches), of the north; and (8) Isana (Siva), of the north-east. 




326 


Perceiving that the time of wedding had arrived, Vasistha sent for Satananda with 
all the honour due to him, and on hearing the call the latter came with all reverence. 
"Kiindly go and bring the bride quickly now." Receiving the sage's order he gladly left. 
The wise queen with her associates was highly pleased to hear the priest's message; 
she sent for a few Brahmana ladies and the elder ladies of the family, who performed the 
family rites and sang charming festal songs. The consorts of the principal gods, who 
were disguised as mortal women, were all naturally lovely and in the prime of their youth. 
The ladies of Janaka's household were delighted to see them and, even though none 
recognized them, the ladies held them dearer than their life. The queen honoured them 
again and again treating them on a par with Uma, Rama and Sarada. After adorning Sita 
and forming a circle about Her they joyously conducted Her to the pavilion. (1 — 4) 

Equipping themselves with auspicious materials Sita's companions and other 
ladies conducted Her to the pavilion with due honour; each of them was lovely of form 
and had all the sixteen forms of adornment and moved with the grace of an elephant in 
rut. At the sound of their melodious strains the sages felt obliged to give up their 
meditation, and love's own cuckoos were abashed. Their ornaments for the toes and 
ankles and the charming bangles on their wrists produced a delightful sound keeping tune 
with their songs. 

Sita in Her native loveliness shone forth among the bevy of ladies as a charming 
personification of Beauty in the midst of the Graces. (322) 


BALA-KANDA 


327 

Sita's elegant form baffles all description: so poor is my wit and so surpassing 
Her charm. When the members of the bridegroom's party saw Slta approach, a 
veritable storehouse of beauty and spotless in everyway, all greeted Her from the core 
of their heart. At the sight of JanakT Rama had His heart's desire fulfilled. King 
Dasaratha with all his other sons was filled with delight; the joy of their heart could not 
be expressed. The gods made obeisance and rained down flowers; while the sages 
uttered their benedictions, which were the source of all blessings. The songs that the 
ladies sang, combined with the sound of kettledrums, produced a loud symphony; men 
and women both were lost in love and rejoicing. In this manner Slta entered the 
pavilion, while great sages recited propitiatory texts in great joy. The two family 
preceptors (Vasistha and Satananda) performed all the religious rites and ceremonies 
and observed the family customs. (1 — 4) 


328 


Having observed the family customs the Gurus (Vasistha and Satananda) in great 
joy are geting Gauri, Gansa and Brahamanas; the gods accepted the homage in visible 
form and gave their blessing with great delight. Whatever auspicious article such as a 
mixture of honey* etc., the sages mentally sought at any particular moment, attendants 
stood ever ready with gold trays and pitchers full of that substance. The sun-god himself 
lovingly pointed out the family usages, which were all scrupulously observed. Having thus 
* The mixture referred to above, which is known by the name of ‘Madhuparka, is usually composed of 
curds, clarified butter, water, honey and sugar. It is a respectful offering made to a guest or to the bridegroom on his arrival at the door of the bride’s father. 

BALA-KANDA 

329 
What words can describe the world-renowned queen-consort of Janaka and Sita's 
mother? The Creator had exhausted in fashioning her all the bright glory, virtue, joy and 
beauty. Perceiving the appropriate time, the great sages sent for her; and in response to 
their call married women whose hasbands were alive brought her with due honour. Queen 
Sunayana shone forth to Janaka's left even as Maina beside Himavan (the mountain- 
king). The king and queen joyfully brought and placed with their own hands gold vases 
and beautiful trays of jewels filled with holy, scented and auspicious water before Sri 
Rama. The sages recited the Veda in joyous tones and at the proper time flowers rained 
down from the heavens. The royal couple were enraptured to behold the Bridegroom and 
began to wash His holy feet. (1 — 4) 

330 

They began to love Sri Rama's lotus-feet; their whole frame was thrilled with 
emotion. The sounds of singing and kettledrums and shouts of victory in the heavens as 
well as in the city overflowed as it were in all direction . The lotus-feet that ever sparkle 
in the lake of Siva's bosom, by thinking of which even for once the mind gets purified 
and all the impurities of the Kali age are driven away, by whose touch the sage 
Gautama's wife, who was full of sin, attained salvation, whose nectar in the form of the 
river Gariga adorns Sambhu’s head and is declared by the gods as the holiest of the 
holy, and by resorting to which with their bee-like minds sages and mystics attain the 
goal of their liking, it is those very feet that the most lucky Janaka washed amidst shouts 
of victory from all corners. Joining the palms of the Bride and the Bridegroom, both the 
family priests recited the genealogy of the two families; and perceiving that the 
Bridegroom had accepted the Bride's hand, Brahma and the other divinities as well as 
men and sages were filled with delight. As the king and queen gazed on the Bridegroom, 
who was the very fountain of joy, the hair on their body stood erect, while their heart was 
filled with rapture. And having gone through all the rites sanctioned either by the Vedas 
or by family usage, the glorious King Janaka gave his Daughter to the Bridegroom. As 
Himavan gave away Girija to the great Lord Siva, and the deity presiding over seas 
bestowed Sri on Hari, so did Janaka give Sita to Rama and thereby earned fair renown 
of an unprecedented character. King Videha (Janaka) was unable to make any supplication, 
since that Prince (Sri Rama) of swarthy complexion had justified his name (Videha) by 
making him forget everything about his body. When oblations had been offered to the 
sacred fire with due rite, the ends of garments of the Bride and the Bridegroom were tied 
together (as a token of their indissoluble union) and the couple began to circumambulate 
the fire (in order to show that the two had been united in the presence of the fire-god as 
a witness). (1 — 4) 


At the sound of the huzzas, the praises sung by the bards, the recitation of the 
Vedic texts, the din of the festal songs and the beating of kettledrums the wise immortals 
rejoiced and rained down flowers from the trees of paradise. (324) 





BALA-KANDA 


331 


The Bride and Bridegroom performed the circumambulation with charming paces; 
while all present feasted their admiring gaze on the spectacle. The lovely couple was 
beyond description; whatever comparison might be suggested would fall short of the 
reality. Lovely images of Rama and Sita were reflected on the pillars of jewels and shone 
as if Love and his consort, Rati, witnessed Sri Rama's matchless wedding appearing in 
numerous forms. Their curiosity and bashfulness were equally great; that is why they 
revealed themselves and went out of sight again and again. All the spectators were 
enraptured; like Janaka they forgot all about themselves. Joyously the sages bade the 
Bride and Bridegroom pace round the fire and accomplished all the rites including the 
ceremonial gifts, Sri Rama applied the vermilion to Sita's forehead, a sight the charm of 
which was altogether beyond description. It seemed as if with a lotus surcharged with 
reddish pollen a serpent thirsting for nectar decorated the moon. Then Vasistha gave the 
direction and the Bride and Bridegroom sat together on the same seat. (1 — 5) 




332 

Sri Rama and Princess Janaki sat together on a costly seat and King Dasaratha 
was glad of heart to see them. Joy thrilled along his veins again and again as he perceived 
the wish-yielding tree of his meritorious deeds bear new fruits. There was rejoicing all over 
the universe; everyone proclaimed that Sri Rama's wedding had been accomplished . With 
one tongue how could anyone describe in full the joy which knew no bounds? Then, 
receiving Vasistha's order, Janaka sent for the other three princesses, Mandavi, Srutakirti 
and Urmila, each clad in a bride's attire. The eldest daughter of his younger brother Kusaketu, 
who was an embodiment of goodness, virtue, joy and beauty, he gave in marriage to 
Bharata after performing every rite with love. Janaki's younger sister (Urmila), whom 
he knew to be the crest-jewel of charming girls, Janaka gave in marriage to Laksmana 
with all honour. Finally the bright-eyed and fair-faced princess Srutakirti, who was a 
mine of all virtues and was well-known for her beauty and amiability, the king gave to 
Ripusudana. When each pair of bride and bridegroom saw that they were well- 
matched with each others*, they felt shy, but rejoiced in their heart of hearts; everyone 

* Rama and Bharata, who had a swarthy complexion were united with Sita and Mandavi respectively 
(who were both fair in complexion); while Laksmana and Satrughna (who were fair of hue) were married with Urmila and Srutakirti (both of whom were swarthy of complexion). 




BALA-KANDA 


333 


joyfully applauded the beauty of each pair, while the gods rained down flowers. All the 
lovely brides with their handsome bridegrooms shone forth in the same pavilion as it the 
faer states (wadeing, sreaming, soe slelp the state) alary with their fore lard (visva Tajas 
prasya and Brahme) are e within the seva. (1 — 4) 

The king of Ayodhya was delighted to see his four sons with their brides, as though 
that jewel of monarchs had realized the four ends of life, (viz., worldly riches, 

religious merit, sensuous enjoyment and Liberation) alongwith the four processes of their 
realization (viz., sacrificial performances, piety, practice of Yoga and spiritual exercise). 
(325) 
All the other princes were married according to the same rites as have been 
described in the case of Sri Rama’s marriage. The richness of the dowry was beyond 
description; the whole pavilion was packed with gold and jewels. There were a number 
of shawls, linen and silk of various colours and designs and of immense value, elephants, 
chariots, horses, men-servants and maid-servants and cows adorned 
with ornaments and vying with the cow of plenty and many other things which were 
more than one could count and defied description. They alone who saw the dowry 
could have some idea of it; even the guardians of the different realms regarded it with 
envy. The king of Ayodhya gladly accepted it all and gave to the beggars whatever 
they liked; only that which was left was taken to the lodgings of the bridegroom's party. 
Then with joined palms Janaka honoured the whole bridegroom's party and spoke in 
gentle tones. (1 — 4) 




334 

BALA-KANDA 


335 


Having honoured the whole bridegroom's party with courtesy, gifts, supplication and 
compliments, King Janaka joyfully paid his homage to and greeted the great sages after 
bestowing his loving attention on them. Bowing his head and invoking the gods he 
addressed them all with joined palms, "Gods and holy men seek one's love alone; can 
the ocean be propitiated by offering as much water as can be held within one's palms?" 
Again, with joined palms Janaka and his younger brother (Kusaketu) submitted to the 
King of Kosala in winning words full of affection, courtesy and sincerity, "By our 
connection with you, O king, we have now been exalted in every respect; alongwith this 
kingdom and all that we possess, pray, look upon us both as your slaves purchased 
without any consideration. Taking these girls as your hand-maidens foster them with 
your unremitting kindness. Pardon me my offence; it was too presumptuous on my part 
to have called you here." The ornament of the solar race, King Dasaratha, in his turn 
flooded the bride's father with all kinds of honour. The courtesy they showed to each 
other was past all telling; for their hearts overflowed with love. Hosts of gods rained down 
flowers and King Dasaratha proceeded to the palace where he and his party had been 
lodged amidst the crash of kettledrums, voces of victory and the chanting of Vedic texts. 
There was much rejoicing both in the heavens and in the city. Then, receiving orders from 
the chief of sages, Vasistha, the lovely companions of the brides conducted them 
alongwith the bridegrooms to the apartment where the guardian deities of the family, had 
been installed for worship during the wedding days. (1 — 4) 

Again and again did Sita gaze on Sri Rama and shrink out of modesty; her heart 
however, refused to shrink. Her charming eyes, athirst with love, outshone the fish. (326) 

336 


Rama's swarthy form was naturally graceful; His beauty put to shame millions of 
Cupids. Dyed with red lac, His lotus-feet, which ever attracted the bee-like minds of 
sages, looked most lovely. His sacred and charming yellow loin-cloth outshone the rising 
sun as well as the lightning. The girdle round His waist together with the sweet-sounding 
small bells was soul-enchanting; His long arms were adorned with beautiful ornaments. 
The yellow sacred thread greatly enhanced His charm; while the ring on His finger would 
ravish all hearts. Beautified with all sorts of wedding adornments He looked most 
charming; His broad chest was adorned with appropriate ornaments. He had a yellow 
scarf with fringes of pearls and gems slung partly under His right armpit and partly 
across His left shoulder. He had a pair of lotus-like eyes and beautiful pendants dangling 
from the lobes of his ears; while His countenance was a storehouse of all comeliness. 
He had lovely eyebrows and a charming nose; while the sacred mark on His forehead 
was an abode of loveliness. And His head was adorned with a beautiful wedding crown 
which had auspicious pearls and gems strung together and woven into it. (1 — 5) 




BALA-KANDA 


337 

Precious gems had been strung together and woven into the lovely wedding crown 
and each of His limbs ravished the heart. At the sight of the bridegroom (Sri Rama) the 
women of the city as well as pretty celestial ladies all tore blades of grass (in order to avert 
the evil eye). After scattering about Him gems, raiment and ornaments they waved lights 
around Him and sang festal songs. The gods rained down flowers; while bards, panegyrists 
and rhapsodists uttered His praises. Married women, whose husbands were alive, happily 
brought the brides and bridegrooms to the apartment reserved for the tutelary deities, and 
with festal songs they most lovingly began to perform customary rites. Goddess Gauri 
Herself taught Rama how to offer a morsel of food to Sita; while Sarada urged Sita to do 
likewise with Rama. The whole gynaeceum was absorbed in the delight of merry-making; 
everyone enjoyed the fruit of her birth. In the gems on Her hand Janaki saw the reflection 
of Sri Rama, the repository of beauty; hence She dared not move Her arm or eyes for fear 
of losing sight of Him. The rapture and love that characterized the gaiety and mirth of the 
occasion surpassed all telling; Sita's companions alone knew them. They escorted all the 
four charming couples to the palace assigned to King Dasaratha and his party. At that 
moment blessings might be heard on all sides and there was great exultation in the city as 
well as in the heavens. Everyone exclaimed with a delighted heart, "Long live the four 
lovely couples!" Great Yogis, Siddhas, eminent sages and divinities sounded their kettledrums 
on beholding the Lord; and raining down flowers and crying "Victory, victory, victory" they 
gladly returned, each to his own realm. (1 — 4) 
Then all the four princes with their brides approached their father. It appeared 
at that time as if the lodgings of the bridegroom's party overflowed with beauty, felicity 
and joy. (327) 




338 


Then there was a banquet with a rich variety of dishes, to which Janaka invited 
all the members of the bridegroom's party. Carpets of incomparable beauty were spread 
on the way as King Dasaratha sallied forth with his sons. The feet of all were reverently 
washed and then they were seated on wooden seats according to their rank. Janaka 
laved the feet of Dasaratha, King of Ayodhya; his courtesy and affection were past 
telling. He then bathed Sri Rama's lotus-feet, that are enshrined in the lotus-like heart 
of Siva. Similarly he washed with his own hands the feet of the other three brothers also, 
treating them on a par with Sri Rama. King Janaka assigned an appropriate seat to each 
guest and sent for all the cooks (for service). Leaves joined together so as to serve for 
plates were set before the guests with due reverence — leaves which were made of 
precious stones and had been joined with gold pins. (1 — 4) 

Clever and polite cooks passed round, and in a trice they served all with curry and 
boiled rice mixed with clarified butter extracted from cows' milk, all of which were 
pleasing and delicious and had been cooked with purity. (328) 




BALA-KANDA 


339 

Cau.: parhca kavala kari jevana lage, gari gana suni ati anurage. 
bhiti aneka pare pakavane, sudha sarisa nahf jahr bakhane.1. 
parusana lage suara sujana, bimjana bibidha nama ko jana. 
cari bhiti bhojana bidhi gal, eka eka bidhi barani na jal.2. 
Taking the five initial morsels as an oblation for the five vital airs the guests 
commenced dining, and were enraptured to hear songs full of raillery. Confections of 
various kinds, sweets as ambrosia and more delicious than one could describe, were 
served to them. Expert cooks then began to serve a variety of seasoned articles which 
were too numerous to be named. Of the four categories of food mentioned in the 
scriptures (viz., 1. that which can be directly swallowed, 2. that which must be 
masticated before it can be gulped, 3. that which can be licked with the tongue and 
4. that which can be sucked) each comprised an indescribable variety of dishes. 
Similarly there were seasoned dishes of various kinds, having six different flavours, each 
flavour being exhibited in numberless varieties. As the dinner was in progress, women 
railed in melodious strains at men and women both, mentioning each by name. Even 
raillery at an opportune time is agreeable and welcome; King Dasaratha and his whole 
party felt amused to hear it. In this way the whole party dined and in the end they were 
all reverently supplied with water to rinse their mouth with. (1 — 4) 

Offering betel-leaves in due form, Janaka paid his homage to King Dasaratha and 
his company; and the crown of all monarchs, Dasaratha, retired to his own apartments 
with a cheerful heart. (329) 


340 

Everyday there was a new festival in the city; days and nights passed like a 
moment. The jewel of king, Dasaratha, woke up at a very early hour; and mendicants 
began to sing his praises. As he gazed upon the princes with their beautiful brides, the 
rapture of his soul was beyond all telling. Having finished his morning routine he called 
on his Guru with a heart full of exultation and love. Making obeisance to him and paying 
him his homage the king with joined palms addressed him in a voice steeped as it were 
in nectar, "Listen, O chief of sages: by your grace I have realized all my ambitions today. 
Now summoning all the Brahmanas, O holy sir, present them with cows adorned in 
everyway." On hearing these words the preceptor applauded the king and then sent for 
the troops of sages. (1 — 4) 

Then came Vamadeva, the celestial sage Narada, Valmiki, Jabali, Visvamitra and 
hosts of other great sages given to austerities. (330) 

The king threw himself upon the ground before them all and worshipping them with 
love offered them seats of honour. Next he sent for four lakhs of cows, all as gentle and 




BALA-KANDA 


341 


beautiful as the cow of plenty; and adorning them all in every possible way he gladly 
bestowed them upon the Brahmanas. The king supplicated them in many ways and said, 
"It is only today that I have attained the fruit of my existence." The delight of the solar 
race was glad to receive their blessings and then sent for beggars and bestowed on 
them, according to their liking, gold, wearing apparel, jewels, horses, elephants and 
chariots. Singing the king's praises and saying, "Glory, glory, all glory to the lord of the 
solar race!" they all went away. In this way the rejoicing in connection with Sri Rama's 
wedding was more than the thousand-mouthed serpent-king could tell. (1 — 4) 
. 

Again and again the king bowed his head at the feet of Kausika and said, "All this 
joy, O chief of sages, is a gift of your gracious looks." (331) 

King Dasaratha extolled in everyway Janaka's affection, amiability, affluence and 
doings. Every morning the King of Ayodhya asked leave to return home; but each time 
Janaka would lovingly detain him. The royal guest received greater and enhanced 
attentions from day to day and was entertained in a thousand ways each day. The city 
witnessed a new rejoicing and festivity everyday; no one liked Dasaratha's departure. In 
this way a number of days passed, as though members of the bridegrooms' party were 
tied by cords of love. The sages Kausika and Satananda then called on King Videha and 
advised him saying, "Now you must let Desaratha go, even though you may not be able 
to part with him out of love." “Very well, my lord", replied the king, and sent for his 
ministers, who came and bowed their heads saying, "May you be victorious, may you 
live long!" (1 — 4) 




342 


"The King of Ayodhya longs to depart: make this known in the gynaeceum." At 
these words the ministers, Brahmanas, courtiers as well as the king himself were 
overwhelmed with emotion. (332) 

When the people of the city heard that the bridegrooms 1 party was leaving, they 
anxiously asked one another if it were a fact. When they learnt that the departure of the 
guests was certain, they were all sad in the same way as lotuses get shrivelled up in 
the evening. Provisions of various kinds were sent to all those places where the 
bridegrooms 1 party had halted while coming from Ayodhya. Dry fruits and confections of 
all kinds and other articles of food too numerous to be mentioned were sent by Janaka 
on the back of oxen and through numberless porters alongwith a number of beautiful 
bedsteads. He also sent 1 ,00,000 horses and 25,000 chariots, all decorated from top 
to bottom, 10,000 adorned elephants in rut, that put to shame the elephants guarding the 
eight quarters, besides cartloads of gold, wearing apparel and jewels and even so she- 
buffaloes, cows and many other articles of various kinds. (1 — 4) 

In this way King Videha gave once more a dowry which was immeasurable and 




BALA-KANDA 


343 


beyond all telling, and before which the wealth possessed by the lords of the different 
worlds looked small. (333) 
Having got all the equipage arranged in the order mentioned above, Janaka had 
everything despatched to Ayodhya. When the queens heard that the bridegrooms 1 party 
was about to start, they all felt miserable even as fish when faced with shortage of water. 
Again and again they took Sita in their lap and blessed and exhorted her in the following 
words: "May you be ever beloved of your lord, and may you live long with him: this is 
our blessing. Serve the parents of your husband and other elders and do the bidding of 
your lord according to his pleasure." In their excess of love Sita's clever companions too 
taught her the duties of a housewife in soft accents. The queens politely admonished all 
the other princesses too and clasped them to their bosom again and again; and as the 
mothers embraced their daughters time and again, they exclaimed, "Why did Brahma ever 
create a woman?" (1 — 4) 
That very moment did Rama, the chief of the solar race, gladly proceeded 
alongwith His brothers to Janaka’s palace to take the brides along with them. (334) 

344 

The people of the city, both men and women, ran to see the four brothers, who 
were naturally lovely. Said one, "They intend leaving today; King Videha has made all 
arrangements for their farewell. So let your eyes drink in their beauty; the four princes 
have been our most welcome guests. Who knows, friend, what virtuous deed we have 
perfomed, in return for which Providence has unexpectedly brought them before our 
eyes? Even as a dying man should stumble on nectar or he who has been starving all 
his life should be able to discover a wish-yielding tree or as one of the damned in hell 
should attain to the abode of Sri Hari, even so have we been blessed with their sight. 
Gaze on Sri Rama's beauty and treasure it in your heart; let your mind fondly cherish 
His image even as a serpent loves the gem in its hood." Thus delighting the eyes of all, 
the four princes went to the royal palace. (1 — 4) 

The ladies of the gynaeceum were transported with joy to behold the four brothers, 
who were oceans of beauty as it were, and the mothers-in-law in their ecstatic mood 
scattered gift and waved lights about the bridegrooms. (335) 





BALA-KANDA 
345 
Greatly moved at the sight of Sri Rama's beauty they affectionately fell at His feet 
again and again. Their heart being rapt in love, the feeling of shyness had bid them adieu; 
how could their natural affection for their sons-in-law be described? After anointing the 
body of Sri Rama and His brothers with urguent they were given a bath and were most 
lovingly entertained with dishes containing the six flavours. Finding it a suitable opportunity 
Sri Rama spoke in accents full of amiability, affection and modesty. “Our royal father 
intends leaving for Ayodhya, and has sent us here to take leave of you. Therefore, 
mothers, grant us permission with a cheerful mind and ever regard us with affection as 
your own children." The ladies of the gynaeceum were distressed to hear these words; 
the mothers-in-law were too overwhelmed with emotion to speak a word. They clasped 
all the princesses to their bosom and while giving them to their lords made humble 
submission to them. (1 — 4) 

With humble submission Queen Sunayana committed Sita to Rama, and with 
joined palms prayed again and again, "I offer myself as sacrifice to You, my all-wise 
darling; You know what passes in the mind of all. May you know that Sita is dear as life 
itself to the whole family, nay, to the entire population of the city, much more to me and 
to her royal father. Therefore, considering her meekness and affection, O Lord of Tulasi, 
treat her as Your maid-servant. 

"You have Your desires ever fulfilled, You are the crest-jewel of the wise; and it 
is love alone that attracts You. You perceive only the good points of Your devotees; You 
eradicate their weaknesses and are an abode of mercy, Rama!" (336) 

346 
So saying the queen remained clinging to His feet; it seemed as if her speech had 
been lost in the quicksands of love. On hearing her fine speech, which was full of 
affection, Sri Rama honoured His mother-in-law in ways more than one. While seeking 
her permission with joined palms He made obeisance to her again and again. Having 
received her blessings the Lord of Raghus bowed His head once more and then 
departed with His brothers. Treasuring up in their heart Sri Rama's lovely and beautiful 
image all the queens were overcome with emotion. Then, recovering themselves, they 
called their daughters and embraced them again and again. They escorted them to some 
distance and then embraced them once more; the love on both sides swelled to a 
considerable extent. While meeting their daughters again and again they were parted by 
the companions of the princesses even as a cow who has just brought forth a calf may 
be parted from the latter. (1 — 4) 
All men and women including the companions of the princesses and the ladies 
of the gynaeceum were overpowered by emotion; it seemed as if pathos and the parting 
of lovers had taken up their abode in the capital of the Videhas. (337) 
BALA-KANDA 
347 

Chapter 59
The parrots and mainas who had been reared by Princess Janakl and having been 
kept in cages of gold had been taught to speak, cried in distress, "Where is Videha's 
daughter?" On hearing their wail who would have the patience to stand the sight? When 
birds and beasts were distressed in this way, how can one depict the feelings of the 
human beeing. Then came King Janaka with his younger brother (Kusadhvaja); due to 
excess of emotion tears rushed to his eyes. Although he was reputed to be a man of 
supreme dispassion, his strength of mind took leave of him the moment he gazed on Sita. 
The king clasped Janakl to his bosom and the great embankment of wisdom toppled 
down. All his wise counsellors admonished him; and realizing that it was no occasion for 
wailing, the king recovered himself. Again and again he pressed his daughters to his 
bosom and ordered beautiful and well-equipped palanquins to be brought. (1 — 4) 
The whole family was overwhelmed with emotion; yet, perceiving that the auspicious 
moment had arrived the king invoked Lord Ganesa and His consort, Siddhi, and helped 
the princesses to ascend the palanquins. (338) 


348 

King Janaka admonished his daughters in various ways more than one, and 
instructed them in the duties of a woman as well as in family customs. He bestowed upon 
Sita a good many men-servants and maid-servants who had been her trusted and 
favourite attendants. As She proceeded on Her journey the citizens felt miserable; while 
good omens, which were all fountains of blessings, appeared. Accompanied by a crowd 
of Brahmanas and his counsellors the king himself followed his daughters to escort them. 
When it was found that the time of departure had come, music began to play and the 
members of the bridegrooms' party made ready their chariots, elephants and horses. 
King Dasaratha sent to all the Brahmanas and sated them with gifts and courtesy. The 
king placed the dust of their lotus-feet on his head and was glad to receive their 
benediction. Invoking the elephant-headed Ganesa he set out on his journey, when many 
good omens, which were the roots of felicity, occurred. (1 — 4) 

The gods gladly rained down flowers and heavenly nymphs sang, as the lord of 
Ayodhya joyfully set forth for his capital amidst the clash of kettledrums. (339) 

King Dasaratha politely persuaded the respectable citizens to retire and having 
reverently called all the mendicants he bestowed on them ornaments and clothes as well 
BALA-KANDA 
349 
as horses and elephants and satiating them with love he made them all self-supporting. 
Glorifying the king again and again they all returned with Sri Rama in their heart. The Lord 
of Ayodhya importuned King Janaka over and over again; but out of affection for his 
relative the latter would not turn back. Once more King Dasaratha addressed him in 
polite terms, "I beg you to turn back, O king; you have already come far enonsh." At last 
King Dasaratha got down from his chariot and remained standing, while his eyes overflowed 
with torrents of love. Then spoke King Videha with joined palms and in accents imbued 
with the nectar of love, "How and in what words should I make my supplication to you? 
You have conferred such high honour on me, O great king." (1 — 4) 

The king of Kosala showed every respect to the father of the bride and his relative, 
Janaka. The embrace in which they held each other was characterized by utmost 
humility and their heart could not contain the love they felt. (340) 


King Janaka bowed his head to the throng of sages and received blessings from 
them all. Next he reverently embraced his sons-in-law, the four brothers, each a mine 
of beauty, amiability and goodness; and joining his graceful lotus hands he spoke in 
accents begotten of love as it were, "How can I extol You, O Rama, sporting as You do 
in the hearts of sages as well as of the great Lord Siva like a swan in the Manasarovara 
lake. That for whose sake Yogis (those given to contemplation) practise Yoga (contemplation) 
renouncing anger, infatuation, the feeling of meum and pride, the all-pervading Brahma 
(Absolute) who is imperceptible and imperishable, the embodiment of consciousness and 
bliss, attributeless and simultaneously possessing divine qualities, who is beyond the ken 




350 



of speech and mind, who is past all speculation, but is only inferred by all and who is 
the same at all times — (1 — 4) 

"That souree of all joy has appeared before my eyes! Everything is easy of access 
in this world to a living being when God is propitious.” (341) 

"You have exalted me in everyway and accepted me as Your own servant. If there 
were ten thousand Saradas and Sesas, and if they were to count for millions of Kalpas, 
the tale of my good fortune, I tell You, and the record of Your virtues, could not be 
exhausted, O Lord of Raghus. I make bold to say something on the strength of my 
conviction that You are pleased with the slightest devotion. I repeatedly beseech You 
with joined palms that my mind may never be deluded into deserting Your feet." On 
hearing these polite words saturated with love Sri Rama who had all His desires fulfilled, 
felt gratified. With the greatest courtesy the latter honoured His father-in-law treating him 
on a par with His own father, Kausika or Vasistha. The king then humbly approached 
Bharata and embracing him with affection gave him his blessings. (1 — 4) 



BALA-KANDA 


351 


Next the king embraced and blessed Laksmana and Ripusudana; overpowered by 
emotion they bowed their heads to one another again and again. (342) 

Paying his respectful compliments to Janaka again and again the Lord of 
Raghus set out on His journey with His three brothers. Janaka approached Kausika, 
clasped his feet and put the dust of the same on his head and eyes. He said, "Listen, 
O lord of sages: to him who has been blessed with your sight nothing is unattainable; 
such is my marrige party conviction. The joy and the bright renown which the regional 
lords of the universe long to have, but feel too diffident to expect — such a joy and glory 
has been brought within my reach; and all achievements follow on seeing you." In these 
words King Janaka made humble submission to Visvamitra, bowing his head again and 
again, and returned after receiving his blessings. The people started on its return 
journey to the sound of kettledrums; all the sections, both big and small, were 
transported with joy. Men and women of the villages, as they gazed on Sri Rama, felt 
gratified on realizing the object of their eyes. (1 — 4) 

Halting at convenient stages in course of the journey and gladdening the people 
on the roadside the marriage procession approached Ayodhya on a sacred day. (343) 




352 


Kettledrums were beaten and good tabors sounded, accompanied by the blast of 
sackbuts and conchs, and the neighing of horses and trumpeting of elephants. Similarly 
there was a clash of cymbals and drums, while clarionets played sweet tunes. The 
citizens were all delighted to hear the procession coming; the hair on their body stood 
erect. They all decorated their own beautiful houses as well as the markets, streets, 
squares and gates of the city. All the lanes were watered with perfumes; here and there 
festal squares were filled in with elegant devices. The bazar was beautified beyond all 
description with festal arches, flags, banners and canopies. Trees of the areca-nut, the 
plantain, the mango, the Bakula, the Kadamba and the Tamala were transplanted 
alongwith their fruit. The beautiful trees thus planted touched the ground (on account of 
their being laden with fruits); they had basins of precious stones constructed around 
them with exquisite skill. (1 — 4) 
Festal vases of various kinds were ranged in order in every house; Brahma and 
the other gods were filled with envy to see the birthplace of Sri Rama (the Chief of 
Raghus). (344) 



BALA-KANDA 


353 


The king's palace looked very charming on that occasion; its decoration captivated 
the heart of Cupid himself. It looked as if auspicious omens and loveliness; affluence 
and mystic powers, joys and smiling prosperity and all kinds of rejoicings had assumed 
a naturally beautiful form and taken their abode in the palace of King Dasaratha. Tell me 
who would not feel tempted to have a look at Sri Rama and Videha's Daughter? Married 
women, whose husbands were alive, sallied forth in troops, each eclipsing Love's 
consort (Rati) by her beauty. They all carried articles of good omen and were equipped 
with lights for waving round the bridegrooms. As they moved along singing all the way, 
it appeared as if Goddess Bharati (the goddess of speech) had appeared in so many 
forms. The king's palace was full of hilarious tumult; the joy of the occasion was ineffable. 
Kausalya and other mothers of Sri Rama were so overwhelmed with emotion that they 
forgot their own body. (1 — 4) 

After worshipping Lord Ganesa and the Slayer of the demon Tripura, they 
bestowed enormous gifts upon the Brahmanas and were supremely delighted as an 
utterly indigent man who had attained the four great prizes of life. (345) 




354 

All the mothers were so overcome with joy and rapture that their feet refused to 
walk and all their limbs began to droop as it were. Full of intense longing for a sight of 
Sri Rama they began to get everything ready for the reception of their sons. Music of 
every kind started playing, while Sumitra gladly got together articles of good omen such 
as turmeric, blades of Durva grass, curds, ordinary leaves, flowers, betel-leaves, areca- 
nuts, auspicious roots, unbroken rice, sprouts of barley, Gorocana, parched paddy and 
lovely blossoms of the Basil plant. Exceedingly charming gold vases, painted with 
various colours, looked like nests built by Cupid's own birds. Auspicious perfumes defied 
all description. In this way all the queens prepared all sorts of auspicious articles. They 
got ready rows of lights arranged in various devices for waving round their sons and with 
a cheerful heart sang melodious festal strains. (1 — 4) 

Carrying in their lotus hands salvers of gold laden with articles of good omen, the 
queen-mothers proceeded joyfully to greet their sons cesemoniously , every limb of their 
body throbbing with emotion. (346) 



The sky became dark with the fumes of burning incense, as though overhung with 
the fast gathering clouds of the month of Sravana (August). The gods rained down 
wreaths of flowers from the trees of paradise, which looked like rows of herons in their 
graceful flight. Lovely festoons made of Jewels looked like rainbows appearing in a row. 
Charming and volatile ladies, appearing on house-tops as quickly or disappearing an alties 
looked like flashes of lightning. The beat of drums resembled the crash of thunder; while 
beggars were as clamorous as the Cataka birds, frogs and peacocks. The gods poured 




BALA-KANDA 


355 


down showers in the form of sacred perfumes, which gladdened the crop in the form of 
all the citizens. Perceiving that a propitious hour had arrived the preceptor (Vasistha) gave 
the word, and the jewel of Raghu's race, King Dasaratha, gladly entered the city with all 
his followers, fixing his mind on Bhagavan Sambhu, Goddess Parvati and Their son, Lord 
Ganesa. (1 — 4) 

Good omens manifested themselves and the gods rained down flowers to the beat 
of drums; while celestial dames danced for joy, singing melodious triumphal songs. (347) 

Bards, minstrels, rhapsodists and skilled dancers chanted the glory of Him (Sri 
Rama) who illumines all the three worlds. Auspicious hailiy sounds and the sacred and 
melodious chanting of the Vedas were heard in all the ten directions. Musical instruments 
of all kinds began to play; gods in heaven and men in the city were enraptured alike. 
Members of the bridegroom's party looked smart beyond description. They were highly 
delighted and could not contain themselves for joy. The people of Ayodhya then greeted 
the king, and were gladdened at the very sight of Sri Rama. They scattered about Him 
jewels and vestments; their eyes were full of tears and their body thrilled over. The women 
of the city gladly waved lights around His head and rejoiced to see the four noble princes. 
They were all the more gratified when they lifted the curtains of the beautiful palanquins 
and beheld the brides. (1 — 4) 




356 


Thus gladdening the heart of all, they arrived at the entrance of the royal palace; 
the delighted mothers waved lights over the princes and their brides. (348) 
They waved lights again and again; the love and rapture which they felt in their 
heart was beyond all words. They scattered about their sons and daughters-in-law 
ornaments, jewels and costumes of various kinds and numberless other articles. The 
queen-mothers were enraptured to behold their four sons alongwith their brides. As they 
gazed again and again on the beauty of Sita and Rama they felt delighted and regarded 
the object of their life in this world as realized. The queen-mothers’ companions, as they 
gazed on Sita's countenance over and over again, sang and extolled their good fortune. 
Moment after moment the gods rained down flowers, danced and sang and offered their 
homage. Seeing the four charming couples Goddess Sarada ransacked all her stock of 
similes, but her choice fell on none; they appeared too trivial. She therefore stood gazing 
with unwinking eyes, enchanted with their beauty. (1 — 4) 
After performing the rites prescribed by the Vedas and family usage the queen- 
mothers waved lights over all the princes and their brides and conducted them to the 
palace, offering water to them as a mark of respect and spreading carpets along the 
way. (349) 
BALA-KANDA 
357 
There were four exquisitely beautiful thrones, which had been fashioned by Cupid 
with his own hands as it were; the queen-mothers seated the brides and the bridegrooms 
on them and reverently laved their holy feet. They then worshipped the blessed couples 
in accordance with the Vedic ritual by offering them incense, light and oblations of food. 
They passed lights around them again and again and waved beautiful fans and chowries 
over their heads. They scattered offerings of various kinds about them; the mothers were 
as full of exultation as a Yogi who has realized the highest truth, or as a lifelong chronic 
who has been able to lay his hands on nectar or as a born pauper who has stumbled 
on a philosopher's stone, or as a blind man who has regained a good vision, or as a dumb 
fellow, whose tongue has been transfused with the eloquence of Sarada, the goddess of 
speech, or even as a hero who has triumphed in battle. (1 — 4) 

The mothers derived joy millions of times greater than the joys mentioned above; 
for in their case it was the Delighter of Raghu's race Himself who had returned home with 
His brothers duly married. As the mothers performed the traditional rites the brides and 
their grooms felt shy; while Sri Rama smiled within Himself on perceiving the ecstasy 
and merriment of the occasion. (350 A-B) 




358 

The mothers gratefully worshipped the gods and manes with due ceremony; for 
all the cravings of their heart had been satisfied. Bowing to all they begged as a boon 
the welfare of Rama and His brothers. The gods conferred their blessings all unseen, 
and the mothers gladly received them by spreading the end of their garment. The king 
sent for those who had joined the marriage party and gave them vehicles, wearing 
apparel, jewels and ornaments. Having received the king's permission and enshrining 
Sri Rama's image in their heart they joyfully returned each to his own house. All the 
men and women of the city were invested with garments and jewels and there was 
jubilant music in every home. The king in his exultation gave whatever the mendicants 
asked for. Every attendant and every musician was sated with gifts and kind 
attentions. (1 — 4) 

They all saluted and invoked blessing upon the king and sang his praises, and 
thereafter the king, accompanied by his preceptor and other Brahmanas, proceeded to 
the palace. (351) 


* BALA-KANDA * 359 
Under Vasistha’s directions he reverently performed all the ceremonies prescribed 
either by usage or by the Veda. The queens, on seeing a crowd of Brahmanas, deemed 
themselves most fortunate and all rose to greet them. They laved the feet of the holy 
ones and helped them all perform their ablutions; while the king duly worshipped and 
entertained them at meal. Overwhelmed with the host's civility, gifts and love, they 
departed glad of heart invoking blessings on him. To Gadhi's son (Visvamitra) he paid 
homage in various ways and said, "My lord, there is no one so blessed as I am." The 
king lavished his praises on him and with his queens took the dust of his feet. He assigned 
the sage a fine quarter in his own palace, while the king and his whole gynaeceum kept 
a vigilant eye on his wants even though unexpressed. Again he adored the lotus feet of 
his preceptor (Vasistha) and made humble submission to him with great affection in his 
heart. (1 — 4) 

All the princes with their brides and the king with his queens bowed to the preceptor's 
feet again and again, while the great sage invoked blessings on them all. (352) 




360 

With his heart overflowing with love he made entreaties to the Guru and placed his 
sons and all his wealth before him. The great sage, however, asked for and accepted 
only his customary due (as a family priest) for the ceremonial occasion and blessed him 
in profusion. And with the image of Sita and Rama installed in his heart he gladly 
proceeded to his own residence. The king then summoned all the Brahmana dames, and 
invested them with beautiful robes, and ornaments. He next sent for the married women 
of the city (whose husbands were alive and who, though born in Ayodhya, were married 
elsewhere) and presented them with garments of their liking. All those who were entitled 
to receive gifts and presents on ceremonial occasions, received their dues from the jewel 
of kings, who rewarded them according to their choice; and the king duly honoured those 
guests whom he regarded as worthy of affection and adoration. The gods who witnessed 
Sri Rama's wedding, rained down flowers, while applauding the jubilation — (1 — 4) 

And with beat of drum the celestials gladly proceeded each to his abode, talking 
to one another of Sri Rama's glory with their heart overflowing with love. (353) 




BALA-KANDA 


361 


Having shown everyone all possible honour the king, whose heart was overbrimming 
with joy, visited the private apartments and beheld the princes with their brides. He gladly 
took the boys in his arms and experienced a thrill of joy which nobody could tell. Similarly 
he affectionately seated the brides in his lap and fondled them again and again with a 
heart full of rapture. The ladies of the gynaeceum were delighted to behold this spectacle; 
the heart of everyone became an abode of joy. The king related how the wedding had 
taken place and everyone was delighted to hear the account. The goodness, amiability, 
nobility, loving nature and the splendid wealth of King Janaka were extolled by King 
Dasaratha in a variety of ways even as a rhapsodist would do; and the queens were 
enraptured to hear the record of his doings. (1 — 4) 
After bathing with his sons the king called the Brahmanas, the preceptor and his 
own kinsmen and, having entertained them at meal, feasted himself on a variety of 
dishes till a couple of hours of the night passed. (354) 
kahi na sakahf sata sarada sesu, beda biramci mahesa ganesu. 
so mat kahau kavana bidhi baranl, bhuminagu sira dharai ki dharanl.3. 
nrpa saba bhlti sabahi sanamani, kahi mrdu bacana bolal rani, 
badhu larikan! para ghara at, rakhehu nayana palaka ki naf.4. 

Lovely women sang joyous songs, and the night became a source of delight and 
soul-enchanting. After rinsing their mouth the king and his party were all given betel-leaves; 
and adorned with garlands and sandal-paste etc., they looked most charming. Looking 
once more at Sri Rama and having received theis permision they proceeded each to his 
own house, bowing their heads. The love and rapture, meriment and magnanimity, 
prosperity, splendour and loveliness that manifested there were more than could be told by 
a hundred Saradas and Sesas, Vedas and Brahmas, Sivas and Ganesas. How, then, 
can I describe them at length any more than an earthly worm could support the globe on 




362 
its head? The king then summoned the queens and, showing every honour to them all, 
admonished them in gentle tones. "The brides are yet damsels and have come to a strange 
house; therefore, take care of them as eyelids protect the eyes. (1 — 4) 

"The boys are tired and feeling drowsy; go and put them to bed." So saying he 
retired to his own bedroom with his mind fixed on Sri Rama's feet. (355) 
Hearing the sweet and loving words of the king, the queens made ready 
bejewelled beds of gold and furnished them with many a rich covering, soft and white as 
the froth of cow's milk, and pillows more charming than words can tell. The bed-chamber, 
made of precious stones, was decked with garlands and supplied with perfumes, lamps 
consisting of bright gems and a canopy lovely beyond words. He alone who saw it could 
know what it was like. Having thus prepared a number of fine beds the queens took up 
Sri Rama and lovingly laid Him down upon one of them. On being repeatedly asked by 
Sri Rama, His brothers too retired each to his own bed. As the mothers gazed on the 
swarthy limbs of Sri Rama, so soft and attractive, they all exclaimed in loving accents, 
"How did you manage, dear child; to kill the most dreadful demoness Tadaka while on 
your way to the forest? (1 — 4) 




BALA-KANDA 


363 

"How were you able to slay those monstrous giants, the wicked Marica and Subahu 
and their followers, who were formidable warriors and counted none before them in 
battle?” (356) 

"My darling may God bless you; it was through the grace of the sage Visvamitra 
alone that God kept away a number of calamities from you. Even while you and your 
brother (Laksmana) guarded the sacrifice, you were initiated into all the secret lore. At 
the mere touch of the dust from your feet the hermit's wife (Ahalya) attained salvation and 
your glory filled the whole universe. In the assembly of princes you broke Siva’s bow, hard 
though it was as a tortoise-shell or adamant or rock. You gained the glory of having 
triumphed over the world and won the hand of Janaka's daughter, and then returned home 
after marrying all your brothers. All your actions have been superhuman and were 
accomplished only by the grace of the sage Kausika. Our birth into the world has borne 
fruit today as we now behold, dear child, your moon-like face. Our prayer is that the 
number of days that have been spent without seeing you, may not be reckoned by the 
Creator at all." (1 — 4) 

Sri Rama gratified all His mothers by addressing sweet and polite words to them; 
and fixing His thought on the feet of Lord Sambhu, His preceptors (Vasistha and Visvamitra) 
and the Brahmanas in general, He closed His eyes in order to sleep. (357) 


364 

Even during sleep His most charming countenance gleamed as a red lotus, half 
closed at eventide. In every house women kept vigil and railed at one another in 
auspicious strains. The queens said to one another, "See, friends, how resplendent the 
city is, and how splendid the night!" The mothers-in-law then slept with the lovely brides 
enfolded in their arms even as serpents would clasp to their bosom the gems from their 
hood. At the holy hour before dawn the Lord awoke, and the cocks commenced their 
beautiful crowing. The rhapsodists and genealogists sang His praises, while the citizens 
flocked to the gate to make their obeisance. The four brothers saluted the Brahmanas 
and gods as well as their preceptor and parents and were glad to receive their 
benedictions. The mothers reverently gazed on their countenance as the princes 
repaired to the gate with the king. (1 — 4) 

Though pure in themselves, the four brothers performed all the purificatory acts 
(such as evacuating the bowels, cleansing the privates and the hands with water and 
clay, rinsing the mouth, brushing the teeth and cleansing the tongue etc.,) and bathed in 
the holy river (Sarayu) and, having gone through their morning routine of prayer etc., 
returned to their sire. (358) 


BALA-KANDA 


365 
The king, on seeing them, clasped them to his bosom; and the four brothers gladly 
sat down on receiving his permission. The whole court was gratified to see Rama and 
accounted their eyes supremely blest. Then came the sages Vasistha and Visvamitra 
and were seated on splendid seats. The father and sons adored the sages and clasped 
their feet and the two preceptors were enraptured to behold Sri Rama. The sage Vasistha 
narrated sacred legends, while the king and the ladies of the gynaeceum listened. In the 
course of his narration the sage gladly recounted in diverse ways the doings of Visvamitra, 
that surpassed the imagination even of hermits. Vamadeva (another family preceptor of 
King Dasaratha) observed that whatever Vasistha said was true and that Visvamitra's 
fair renown had pervaded all the three spheres. Everyone rejoiced to hear that, while Sri 
Rama and Laksmana were all the more delighted at heart. (1 — 4) 

There was constant felicity, joy and rejoicing and days rolled on in this way. The 
city of Ayodhya was inundated with a tidal wave of delight, swelling higher and still 
higher. (359) 




366 


After fixing an auspicious day the sacred strings (tied round the wrist of the brides 
and bridegrooms before the wedding for warding off evil-spirits) were untied with no little 
felicity, joy and merriment. The gods were filled with envy to see new rejoicings everyday 
and begged of the Creator that they might be born in Ayodhya. Visvamitra intended 
leaving everyday, but was detained by Sri Rama's affectionate entreaties. Seeing the 
king's devotion to him, grow a hundredfold day after day the great sage Visvamitra was 
full of praise for him. At last when he asked permission to go, the king was greatly moved 
and with his sons stood before him saying, "My lord, all that I have, is yours; while I and 
my sons and wives are your servants. Be ever gracious to these boys and condescend 
from time to time to bless me with your sight." So saying, the king with his sons and 
queens fell at his feet, and speech failed his tongue. The Brahmana (Visvamitra) invoked 
upon him every kind of blessing and departed amidst a scene of love that defied all 
description. Sri Rama and all His brothers lovingly escorted him and returned only when 
they were allowed to go back. (1 — 5) 

The delighter of Gadhi's race gladly went on his way praising within himself Sri 
Rama's beauty, King Dasaratha's piety, the wedding of 6ri Rama and Sita and the 
festivities and rejoicings connected therewith. (360) 

BALA-KANDA 


367 

Vamadeva and the wise preceptor of Raghu's race, Vasistha, once more narrated 
the story of Visvamitra (Gadhi's son). On hearing the sage's bright glory the king praised 
to himself the value of his stock of merits (which attracted the sage to his house and won 
for him his favour). At the royal command the people dispersed, while the king with his 
sons returned to his palace. Everywhere the people sang the story of Sri Rama's 
wedding, and His holy and fair fame was diffused through all the three spheres. From the 
day Sri Rama came home duly married, every kind of joy took its abode in Ayodhya. The 
festivities that followed the Lord's wedding were more than the goddess of speech or the 
Lord of serpents, Sesa, could tell. I know that the glory of Sri Rama and Sita is the very 
life and sanctifier of the race of poets and a mine of blessings; that is why I have said 
something about it just to hallow my speech. (1 — 4) 

For the purpose of hallowing his speech has Tulasidasa sung Sri Rama's glory; 
otherwise the story of Sri Rama is a limitless ocean, which no poet has ever been able 
to cross. Those men who reverently hear or sing the tale of the auspicious festivities 
attendant on Sri Rama's investiture with the sacred thread and marriage shall ever be 
happy by the grace of Videha's Daughter and Sri Rama. 

Those who lovingly sing or hear the story of Sita and Rama's marriage shall ever 
rejoice; for Sri Rama's glory is an abode of felicity. (361) 

Thus ends the first descent into the Manasa lake of Sri Rama's exploits, 
that eradicates all the impurities of the Kali age. 






















 





























