 (The Manasa lake containing the exploits of Sri Rama) 

Descent Two 

(Ayodhya-Kanda) 
Chapter 60
May He in whose lap shines forth the Daughter of the mountain-king, who carries 
the celestial stream on His head, on whose brow rests the crescent moon, whose throat 
holds poison and whose breast is the support of a huge serpent, and who is adorned by 
the ashes on His body, may that Chief of gods, the Lord of all, the Destroyer of the 
universe, the omnipresent Siva, the moon-like Sankara, ever protect me. (1) 
May the splendour of Sri Rama’s lotus-like face, which neither grew brighter at the 
prospect of His being installed on the throne of Ayodhya nor was dimmed by the painful 
experience of exile in the woods, ever bring sweet felicity to me. (2) 

370 

I adore Sri Rama, the Lord of Raghu’s race, whose limbs are as dark and soft as 
a blue lotus, who has Sita enthroned on His left side and who holds in His hands a 
mighty arrow and a graceful bow. (3) 

Chapter 61
From the day Sri Rama returned home duly married, there was new festivity and 
jubilant music everyday. The fourteen spheres were like huge mountains on which clouds 
in the shape of meritorious deeds poured showers of joy. The water thus discharged 
formed into gorgeous rivers of affluence, success and prosperity, that rose in spate and 
flowed into the ocean of Ayodhya. The men and women of the city were like jewels of a 
fine quality, bright, priceless and charming in everyway. The splendour of the capital was 
beyond description; it seemed as if the Creator’s workmanship had been exhausted there. 
Gazing on the moon-like face of Sri Ramacandra the citizens were all happy in everyway. 
All the mothers with their companions and maids were delighted to see the creeper of their 
heart’s desire bear fruit. The king was particularly enraptured when he saw or heard of Sri 
Rama’s beauty, goodness, amiability and genial disposition. (1 — 4) 



AYODHYA-KANDA 


371 

All cherished in their heart a common desire and said in their prayer to the great Lord 
Siva, “Would that the king in his own life-time appointed Sri Rama as his regent.” (1) 
One day the Chief of Raghus sat with all his court in the state assembly hall. 
Himself the embodiment of all virtues, the king was overjoyed to hear of Sri Rama’s fair 
renown. Every monarch solicited his favour, and the very guardians of the world 
cultivated his friendship while respecting his wishes. In all the three spheres of the 
universe and in all time — past, present or future — none could be found so abundantly 
blessed as Dasaratha. Of him who had for his son Rama, the root of all bliss, whatever 
might be said, would fall short of the truth. The king casually took a mirror in his hand 
and looking at his face in the mirror, set his crown straight. The hair beside his ears had 
turned grey; it seemed as if old age were whispering into his ears, “O king, make Rama 
your regent and thereby realize the object of your life and birth in this world.” (1 — 4) 
Entertaining this idea in his mind and finding an auspicious day and a suitable 
opportunity the king communicated it to his Guru (Vasistha) with his body thrilling over 
with emotion and his mind filled with rapture. (2) 

372 

Said the king, “Listen, O chief of sages: Rama is now accomplished in everyway. 
Servants and ministers, nay, all the people of the city and others who are either my 
enemies or friends or neutrals, hold Rama as dear as I do. It seems your benediction 
itself has incarnated in his lovely form. What more, my lord, all the Brahmanas and 
their families cherish the same love for him as you do. Those who place on their head 
the dust from the Guru’s feet acquire mastery as it were, over all fortune. No one has 
realized it as I have done; I have obtained everything by adoring the holy dust from 
your feet. Now there remains only one longing in my heart and that too will be realized 
by your grace, my lord.” The sage was delighted to perceive his artless devotion and 
said, “O king, give me your commands.” (1 — 4) 

 “O king, your very name and glory grant all one’s desires. The object of your 
heart’s desire, O jewel of monarchs, is accomplished even before you entertain the 
desire.” (3) 



* AYODHYA-KANDA * 373 
Chapter 62
When the king was assured in his heart of the Guru being so favourably disposed 
in everyway, he cheerfully said in gentle tones, “My lord, let Rama be invested with regal 
powers; pray, command me so that necessary preparations may be set on foot. Let this 
happy event take place during my life-time so that all people may attain the reward of their 
eyesight. By the Lord’s blessing Siva has allowed everything to pass smoothly; this is the 
only longing that I have in my mind. Then I will not mind whether this body survives or not, 
so that I may not have to repent afterwards.” The sage was pleased to hear these 
agreeable words of Dasaratha, which were the very fountain of felicity and joy. He said, 
“Listen, O king: aversion to Sri Rama makes one repent, while His adoration is the only 
means of soothing the agony of one’s heart; nay, He follows like a shadow where there is 
unadulterated love; the same Lord Sri Rama has been born as a son to you.” (1 — 4) 


“O king, let there be no delay, and make every preparation quickly. That day itself 
is auspicious and full of blessings, when Rama it proclaimed regent.” (4) 

The king returned rejoicing to his palace and summoned his servants and 
counsellors including Sumantra. They bowed their heads saying, “Victory to you may 




374 


you live long;” and the king placed before them the most auspicious proposal. “If this 
proposal finds favour with you all, instal Sri Rama on the throne with a cheerful heart.” 
The counsellors were glad to hear these agreeable words, which fell like a shower on the 
young plant of their desire. The ministers prayed with joined palms: “May you continue 
to live for millions of years, O sovereign of the world. You have thought out a good plan 
which is a source of happiness to the whole world; therefore, lord, make haste and lose 
no time.” The king was pleased to hear the encouraging words of the ministers; it looked 
as if a growing creeper had obtained the support of a strong bough. (1 — 4) 

Said the king, “Whatever orders the great sage Vasistha may be pleased to give 
in connection with Sri Rama’s coronation should be promptly carried out.” (5) 
The great sage Vasistha gladly said in soft accents, “Fetch water from all principal 
sacred places.” And then he enumerated by name a number of auspicious objects such 
as herbs, roots, flowers, fruits, leaves, chowries, deerskins, and draperies of various 
kinds including countless varieties of woollen and silken textiles, jewels and numerous 
other articles of good omen which were considered useful in this world for the coronation 
of a king. Detailing all the procedure laid down in the Vedas he said, “Erect canopies of 
all sorts in the city and transplant in the streets on all sides trees of the mango, arecanut 
and plantain with fruits. Paint beautiful designs on the floors filling them with costly jewels 
and tell the people to decorate the bazar promptly. Worship Lord Ganesa and your 
preceptor as well as the tutelary deity and render service in every form to the 
Brahmanas, the very gods on earth.” (1 — 4) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


375 
 “Prepare flags and banners, festal arches and vases as well as horses, chariots 
and elephants.” Bowing to these orders of the great sage (Vasistha) all concerned 
applied themselves to their own work.” (6) 
With whatever duty the great sage charged any man, the latter accomplished it so 
promptly as if it had been done by him beforehand. The king adored Brahmanas, holy men 
and gods, and performed auspicious rites for the sake of f§ri Rama’s welfare. As soon as 
the delightful news of Sri Rama’s installation reached the ears of the people, the whole of 
Ayodhya resounded with festal music. Good omens manifested themselves in the person 
of Sri Rama and Sita; Their graceful lucky limbs began to throb. Experiencing a thrill of joy 
they lovingly said to one another, “The omens prognosticate Bharata’s return. Many days 
have passed and our heart longs to meet him. Auspicious omens assure us of our meeting 
with a beloved friend, and in this world there is no one so dear as Bharata; the good omens 
can thus have but one meaning.” Sri Rama anxiously remembered His half-brother (Bharata) 
day and night, even as a turtle has its heart fixed on its eggs. (1 — 4) 

That very time the ladies of the palace were delighted to hear this most auspicious 




376 

news, even as the waves of the ocean commence their lovely sport on perceiving the 
waxing moon. (7) 

Those who broke the news first were richly rewarded with ornaments and costumes. With 
their body thrilling over with emotion and heart full of rapture all the queens started preparing 
festal vases. Queen Sumitra painted with coloured meal lovely diagrams in various charming 
designs and filled them with jewels. Overwhelmed with delight Sri Rama’s mother (Kausalya) 
sent for the Brahmanas and gave them gifts profusely. She worshipped female deities of the 
village and other gods and Nagas and vowing them further offerings said to them, “In your 
mercy grant me a boon which may ensure Sri Rama’s welfare.” Moon-faced and fawn-eyed 
ladies sang festal strains in a voice as sweet as the notes of a cuckoo. (1 — 4) 

Men and women rejoiced in their heart to hear of Sri Rama’s installation on the 
throne; and thinking God to be favourably disposed towards them all began to make 
preparations. (8) 

* AYODHYA-KANDA * 


377 


The king then called Vasistha and sent him to Sri Rama’s apartments for tendering 
opportune advice. The moment the Lord of Raghus, Sri Rama, heard of the Guru’s 
arrival, He repaired to the door and, bowed His head at his feet. Reverently offering him 
water to wash his hands with He ushered the sage and paid him honour by worshipping 
him in the sixteen prescribed modes.* Then clasping his feet with Sita, Sri Rama spoke 
with His lotus palms joined, “A master’s visit to his servant’s house is the root of all 
blessings and a panacea for all evils; yet it would have been more fitting, my lord, for the 
master to have lovingly sent for the servant and charged him with a duty; for such is the 
right course. Since, however, my lord has laid aside his authority and showed his affection 
to me (by calling on me) my house has been hallowed today. I am ready to do what I 
am bid, holy sir; for a servant is benefited only by serving his master.” (1 — 4) 

On hearing these words, steeped in affection as they were, the sage applauded 
the Chief of Raghus, Sri Rama, and said, “It is but meet, O Rama, that you should say 
so, the ornament of the solar race that you are.” (9) 

* The sixteen modes of worship prescribed in Tantric works consist in offering the following: — (1) 
Asana (seat), (2) Padya (water for washing the feet), (3) Arghya (water for washing the hands), (4) Acamamya 
(water to drink), (5) SnanTya (water for ablution), (6) Gandha (sandal-paste), (7) Vastra (raiment), (8) Puspa 
(flowers), (9) Dhupa (burning incense), (10) DTpa (light), (11) Naivedya (food), (12) Acamanlya (water for 
rinsing the mouth), (13) Tambula (betel-leaves), (14) Daksina (a gift in coins), (15) Pradaksina (circumambu- 
lation), and (16) NTrajana (waving lights). 




378 


Extolling Sri Rama’s goodness, amiability and noble disposition, the lord of sages, 
Vasistha, said, thrilling over with emotion, “The king has made preparations for the 
installation ceremony; he would invest You with regal powers. Rama, You should observe 
religious austerity today so that God may bring this affair to a happy conclusion.” Having 
admonished Him in this way the Guru returned to the king; while Sri Rama felt uneasy in 
His heart and said to Himself, “My brothers and myself were all born together and together 
have we dined, slept and played in our childhood; the piercing of our ear-lobes, (one of the 
sixteen sacraments incumbent on a Hindu), our investiture with the sacred thread, wedding 
and all other ceremonies have been gone through together. The only unseemly practice in 
this spotless line is that the eldest should be installed on the throne to the exclusion of his 
younger brothers.” May this loving and graceful expression of regret on the part of the Lord 
drive away all crookedness from the mind of His devotees. (1 — 4) 
On that very occasion came Laksmana steeped in love and rapture; Sri Rama, 
who delighted Raghu’s race even as the moon delights a lily flower, greeted him with 
endearing words. (10) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
379 
There was a sound of music of various kinds, and the rejoicing in the city was 
beyond words. All prayed for Bharata’s return (from his maternal uncle’s) and said to one 
another, “Would that Bharata came with expedition and obtained the reward of his eyes.” 
In every bazar, street, house, lane and place of resort men and women talked to one 
another, “When will that blessed hour start tomorow; during which God will fulfil our 
desire, when with Sita beside Him Sri Rama will take His seat on the throne of gold and 
when the object of our desire will be accomplished?” They all said, “When will the morrow 
come?” While the wicked gods prayed that some trouble might brew in the meantime. 
The rejoicing that was going on in Ayodhya did not please them even as a moonlit night 
is not liked by a thief. Invoking Sarada the gods supplicated her and laying hold of her 
feet fell at them again and again. (1 — 4) 
“Perceiving our grave calamity, O Mother, manipulate things in such a way today 
that Sri Rama may retire into the forest, relinquishing His throne, and the object of us 
immortals may be wholly accomplished.” (11) 
Hearing this prayer of the divinities goddess Sarada stood still and was grieved at 
the thought that she was going to play the same role with reference to the people of 
Ayodhya as a wintry night does with respect to a bed of lotuses. Seeing her downcast 
the gods spoke again in a suppliant tone, “Mother, not the least blame will attach to you; 
for the Lord of Raghus is above sorrow and joy alike. You are fully acquainted with Sri 
Rama’s glory. As for the people, every embodied soul is subject to pleasure and pain 
according to its fate. Therefore, you should go to Ayodhya for the good of the celestials.” 




380 



Chapter 62
Clasping her feet again and again they exerted great pressure on her till she yielded and 
set out, considering the gods as mean-minded. She said to herself, “Though their abode 
is on high, their doings are mean; they cannot see others prosperity.” Again, reflecting 
on the role she was destined to perform in the days to come, when worthy poets would 
seek her favour, she came with a cheerful heart to the capital of Dasaratha like the 
intolerably evil influence of a planet. (1 — 4) 

Now Kaikeyi (Bharata’s mother) had a dull-witted servant-maid, Manthara by 
name; having perverted her reason and making her a receptacle of ill-repute, the 
goddess of speech returned to her abode. (12) 
Manthara saw the city decorated and festal music melodiously playing; she, 
therefore, asked the people, “What is all this rejoicing about?” When she heard of Sri 
Rama’s coming installation, she felt distressed in her heart. That evil-minded and low- 
born woman pondered how mischief might be created overnight, even as a wily Bhila 
woman who has seen a honeycomb hanging from a tree schemes how to get hold of 
the honey. Pulling a long face she approached Bharata’s mother. “What makes you 
look so grave?” the queen smilingly asked. She made no answer, but only heaved 
deep sigh, and adopting the way of women shed crocodile tears. Said the queen 
laughing, “You are a most saucy girl; what I suspect, therefore, is that Laksmana has 
taught you a lesson.” Even then the most wicked servant-maid would not speak and 
merely hissed like a black cobra. (1 — 4) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


381 

Apprehensive of misfortune as she was, the queen said to her, “How is it that you 
do not speak? I hope Rama and his royal father, Laksmana, Bharata and Ripudamana 
(Satrughna) are all well?” The hump backed woman (Manthara) was pained at heart to 
hear these words. (13) 
“Why should anyone, O mother, give me a lesson? And on whose strength shall 
I be cheeky? Who is happy today, except Rama, whom the king is going to invest with 
regal powers? Providence has turned most favourable to Kausalya; seeing this she 
cannot contain the pride of her bosom. Why not go and se for yourself all the splendour, 
the sight of which has agitated my mind? Your son is away; while you are complacent 
under the notion that your lord is under your thumb. You are excessively fond of sleeping 
on a cushioned bed and are unable to detect the deceitful cunning of the king.” Hearing 
these affectionate words, yet knowing her malicious mind the queen angrily said, “Keep 
quiet now. If you ever speak thus again, expert as you are in sowing seeds of discord 
in a family, I will have your tongue pulled out.” (1 — 4) 

 “The one-eyed, the lame and the hump-backed, know these to be perverse and 




382 

wicked, more so if they come of women folk and particularly those belonging to the menial 
class!” said Bharata’s mother and smiled. (14) 
 “O sweet-tongued one, I have said all this to you by way of advice; otherwise I cannot 
even dream of being angry with you. That day alone will be auspicious and a bestower of 
good fortune, when your words will come to be true. The eldest brother should be the lord 
and the younger ones his servants: such is the blessed custom prevailing in the solar race. 
If Sri Rama’s coronation is really taking place tomorrow, ask of me, my friend, what pleases 
your mind and I will grant it. By his innate disposition Rama loves all his mothers as dearly 
as Kausalya. He is particularly fond of me; I have had occasions to test his love. Should God 
in His mercy vouchsafe to me a human birth again, may Rama and Sita be my son and 
daughter-in-law respectively. Rama is dearer to me than life; how is it that you have got 
perturbed at the news of his coronation?” (1 — 4) 
 “I adjure you in Bharata’s name to tell me the truth putting away all deceit and 
reservation. Let me know the reason why you should grieve on an occasion of 
rejoicing.” (15) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 

383 
“I have had all my ambitions fulfilled as a result of my speaking only once; I shall 
now speak again with another tongue. My wretched head surely deserves to be smashed 
since you get offended even at my well-meaning words. Those alone who speak unctuous 
words, minding not what is true and what is false, are your favourites, while I am 
disagreeable to you. From this day onward I too will utter only that which is palatable to 
my mistress, or else will keep mum all the twenty-four hours. God has given me a 
misshapen body and made me dependent on others; one must reap as one has sown 
and must get what one has given. Whoever may be the ruler, I lose nothing thereby; for 
shall I cease to be a servant and become a queen now? Damnable is my nature in that I 
cannot bear to see harm come to you. That is why I just broached the topic. But it was a great blunder on my part; therefore, pardon me, O venerable lady.” (1 — 4) 
Hearing these pregnant and agreeable deceitful words, the queen, who was a 
woman with an unstable mind and was dominated by the celestial Maya, reposed her 
faith in an enemy mistaking her for a friend. (16) 
Again and again the queen politely questioned Manthara, hyptonized as she was 
by the latter’s guileful words like a doe fascinated by the music of a Bhila woman. Her 
mind was changed according to the decree of fate and the servant-maid was pleased to 
find her plan succeed. She replied, “While you persist in questioning me, I am afraid to 
open my lips, since you have given me the name of a feud creator in the family.” Thus 
working up the queen’s faith and manipulating her according to her own liking in everyway, 
Manthara, who spelt disaster for Ayodhya like the evil influence exerted by the planet 
Saturn for a period of seven and a half years (according to Indian Astrology), then spoke, 
“You said just now, O queen, that Sita and Rama were dear to you and that you had 
endeared yourself to Rama; this assertion of yours is true. This is, however, a thing of 
the past; those days have now gone by. When the tide turns even friend become foes. 
The sun fosters the family of lotuses; but in the absence of water it burns them to ashes. 
Your co-wife (Kausalya) would strike at your very root; protect it by means of a good fence 
in the form of a remedy. (1 — 4) 
 “You are free from anxiety on the strength of your husband’s love and know him 
to be under your sway. The king, however, is malicious of mind, though sweet of tongue; 
while you possess a guileless nature.” (17) 


AYODHYA-KANDA 


385 
 “Rama’s mother (Kausalya) is clever and deep; finding a suitable opportunity she 
has turned it to account. You must know it is at the suggestion of Rama’s mother that 
the king has sent away Bharata to his maternal grandfather’s. She says to herself, “All 
my other co-wives serve me well, only Bharata’s mother (yourself) is proud, because of 
her influence with her lord. It is therefore, O mother, that you rankle in Kausalya’s heart; 
but she is too crafty to disclose her mind. The king is particularly fond of you; but due 
to the jealousy to which a co-wife is naturally subject, Kausalya cannot tolerate it. That 
is why by resorting to machination and winning over the king she has prevailed on him 
to fix a date for Rama’s installation on the throne. The coronation of Rama is in accord 
with the traditions of the family; it is liked by all and is quite to my taste. I, however, 
shudder to think of the consequences; may heaven so ordain that the mischief may 
recoil on her own head.” (1 — 4) 
Inventing and injecting many a mischievous formula Manthara put the queen of 
the scent and told her a hundred and one stories of co-wives so as to foment her 
jealousy. (18) 


As fate would have it, the queen felt assured in her heart of Manthara’s fidelity; 




386 

adjuring her by her own life she questioned Manthara once more, “What is it that you 
inquire about? It is strange that you should not understand things even now! Even a 
quadruped knows what is good or bad for it. Preparations have been going on for the last 
fortnight; while you have got the news from me today. I get food and clothing under your 
tutelage; hence I cannot be blamed for speaking the truth. If I tell a lie giving it the colour 
of truth, God will punish me for the same. Should Rama’s coronation take place tomorrow, 
God will have sown the seed of adversity for you. I swear and tell you most emphatically, 
O lady, that you have been discarded now as a fly from a cup of milk. If you and your 
son accept the role of servants, then alone you will be allowed to stay in the house; and 
in no other circumstance.” (1 — 4) 

“Kadru (the progenitress of the serpent race) persecuted her co-wife Vinata* coronation; so will Kausalya tyrannize over you. Bharata will rot in prison, while Laksmana will be Rama’s lieutenant.” (19) 
* The names Kadru and Vinata take us back to the beginning of creation. The Puranas (a class of sacred literature dealing with the history of the entire cosmos and wrongly supposed by modern critics both in India and abroad to be works on mythology) declare that the different species of living beings from celestials down to the tiniest insect took their common descent from the sage Kasyapa through different mothers. Of them Kadru gave birth to the race of serpents, while Vinata brought forth the winged creation. 
Once there was a controversy between the two ladies about the colour of the tail of the celestial horse 
Uccaihsrava. Vinata insisted that the horse was white in colour while Kadru maintained that it was dark. It was mutually agreed that the lady whose version proved untrue should serve the other as a handmaid for the rest of her life. When Kadru came to know that the horses were really white in colour, she managed to hoodwink the guileless Vinata by asking her sons (the cobra race) to cover the tail of Uccaihsrava by their own dark forms and thus lending it a dark hue. Vinata was thus made to serve her co-wife for a number of years and suffered great persecution at her hands, till she was liberated by Garuda (Vinata’s powerful son and the celebrated vehicle of Bhagavan Visnu). The story is told at length in the Adiparva of the Mahabharata. 


AYODHYA-KANDA 
387 
Chapter 63
Hearing these unpleasant remarks, Kekaya’s daughter (Kaikeyi) shrivelled with fear 
and could not utter a word. Her body was wet with perspiration and shook like a plantain 
stalk. The humpback then bit her tongue (for fear lest the gloomy picture drawn by her 
might break Kaikeyi’s heart). Telling her one after another many a story of wiles Manthara 
comforted the queen and asked her to be of good cheer. At last the tide turned and 
Kaikeyi conceived a fondness for mischief; she applauded a heron mistaking it for a swan. 
“Listen, O Manthara; what you say is quite true. My right eye ever throbs and I have an 
evil dream every night; but in my folly I did not tell you. I cannot help it, my friend; I am 
so guileless by nature. I cannot distinguish a friend from a foe.” (1 — 4) 
 “Never to this day have I done an evil turn to anybody during my ascendancy. 
I wonder for what offence has Providence subjected me to such terrible suffering all at once.” 
 ( 20 ) 
“I would fain go and spend the rest of my life at my father’s but would on no 
account serve a co-wife so long as there is life in me. For him whom heaven allows so 
survive as a dependant of an enemy, death is preferable to life.” The queen uttered many 
such words of despondency; at this the humpback resorted to the wily ways of a woman. 
“Why should you speak in this strain, donot lose heart? Your happiness and good-luck 
will be ever on the increase. Whoever has contemplated such gross mischief to you shall 
eventually reap its fruit. Ever since I heard of this plot, my lady, I have felt no appetite 
during the day and have had no wink of sleep at night. I consulted the astrologers and 
they declared in positive terms: ‘Bharata shall be the king; this much is certain.’ If you 




388 
act up to it, 0 good lady, I will offer a suggestion to you; the king is under an obligation 
to you.” (1 — 4) 
 “At your suggestion I would throw myself down a well and can even forsake my 
son and husband. When you tell me to do something in view of my dire distress, why 
should I not comply with it in my own interest?” (21) 
When she made Kaikeyi and treating her as an offering accepted for sacrifice the 
humpback whetted the knife of trickery on the stone of her heart. The queen, however, 
like a sacrificial beast who nibbled the green turf, did not foresee the impending calamity. 
Agreeable to hear, yet painful in consequence, were the words she spoke; it seemed as 
if she was administering honey mixed with poison. Said the maid-servant, “Do you, or 
do you not, remember the incident you once told me, my lady? You have in reserve with 
the king a couple of boons that he once promised you.* Ask for them today and soothe 


* It is stated in Valmiki’s Ramayana that King Dasaratha was once engaged in a combat with the 
demon king Sambara on behalf of the gods. The king was mortally wounded and fell unconscious in his chariot, while his charioteer also fell. The valiant Queen Kaikeyi, who had accompanied her royal husband to the field of battle assumed the role of a charioteer and removed the king to a safe retreat. When the king regained his consciousness and came to know of the timely help rendered by the queen he was immensely pleased and offered her a couple of boons. The queen, however, kept them in reserve and did not ask for anything on that occasion. 

The Adhyatma-Ramayana (forming part of the Brahmanda-Purana), however, tells a different story. 
There we are told that while King Dasaratha was once fighting with the demons on behalf of the gods the axle 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


389 


your heart. Bestow sovereignty on your son and an abode in the forest on Rama and rob 
your co-wives of all their joy. When the king swears by Rama, ask the boons only then, 
so that the former may not go back upon his word. The scheme will fail if this night is 
allowed to pass; cherish my words as dearer than life.” (1 — 4) 

Having thus hatched her very cruel design against the queen the wretch said, 
“Betake yourself to the sulking-room. Manage the whole affair discreetly and be not too 
ready to believe.” (22) 
Holding the humpback dear as life the queen applauded her uncommon shrewdness again and again. “I have no such friend as you in the whole world,” she said. “You have served as a prop to one who was drifting along a stream. If God fulfils my heart’s desire tomorrow, I will cherish you, my dear, as the apple of my eye.” Thus lavishing every term of endearment on her maid-servant, Kaikeyi retired to the sulking-room. Discord was the seed and the servant-girl (Manthara) the rainy season; while the evil mind of Kaikeyi served as the soil. Fed by the water of wiliness the seed took root and sprouted with the two boons as its leaves and will eventually bear the fruit of adversity. Gathering about her every token of resentment, Kaikeyi lay down on the floor in the sulking-room; while enjoying of the wheels of his chariot got loosened and was about to fall when Queen Kaikeyi, who had accompanied the king to the battlefield, perceived it and inserting her own arm in place of the axle prevented the chariot from toppling down and held her arm in that position till her husband was able to vanquish his foe. The king was filled with admiration and gratitude when he marked this heroic feat of his queen and offered her two boons, which the queen prudently reserved for a future occasion. 




390 

sovereignty, she was betrayed by her wicked mind. There was a great flutter in the 
gynaeceum as well as in the city; nobody had any inkling of this evil design. (1 — 4) 


In their ecstasy of joy all the citizens, both men and women, busied themselves 
with festive preparations and the entrance to the royal palace was flooded with a 
continuous stream of people going in and coming out. (23) 

Delighted at the news a few of Sri Rama’s boy-companions called on Him in a 
body; and sensible of their affection the Lord received them kindly, and politely enquired 
after their health and welfare. After receiving the permission of their beloved friend they 
returned home speaking highly of Him to one another. “Is there anyone in this world so 
amiable and constant in his affection as Rama? In whichever species we may be born 
from time to time as a result of our actions, may God grant us that Sita’s spouse may 
be our lord and we his servants, and that this relation between us may continue till the 
end.” Everyone in the city cherished the same desire; but there was intense agony in 
Kaikeyi’s heart. Who is not ruined by evil company? Man loses his wit by following the 
counsel of vile men. (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


391 

Chapter 64
At eventide the king joyously visited Kaikeyi’s palace; it looked as if love incarnate 
had called on harshness personified. (24) 

The king was taken aback when he heard of the sulking-room. His feet refused 
to advance on account of fear. He under whose powerful arm the lord of celestials 
dwelt secure and whose goodwill was even sought by all king was stunned at the news 
of his wife’s anger: look at the mighty power of sexual love. Even those who have 
endured the blows of a spear, thunderbolt or sword, have been overcome with the 
flower shafts of Rati’s lord (the god of Love). The king timidly approached his beloved 
queen and was terribly distressed to perceive her condition. She was lying on the 
floor in old and coarse attire having cast away all the ornaments of her person. Her 
wretched garb so eminently befitted her, prognosticating as it were, her impending 
widowhood. Drawing close to her the king asked in soft accents, “Why are you angry, 
my soul’s delight?” (1 — 4) 

As the king touched her with his hand saying “Why are you angry, my queen?” 
Kaikeyi threw it aside and flashed upon him a furious glance like an enraged serpent with 




392 
the two (above-mentioned) cravings of her heart for its bifurcated tongue and the boons 
(that had been promised to her by the king) for its fangs, spying out a vital part. As fate 
would have it, says Tulasi, the king took it all as an amorous sport. 
Said the king again and again, “Tell me the cause of your anger, O fair-faced, 
bright-eyed dame with a voice melodious as the notes of a cuckoo and a gait resembling 
that of an elephant.” (25) 
“Who is it, my dear, that has harmed you? Who is there with a head to spare and who 
is it that is courted by death? Tell me what pauper I should exalt to the position of a king and 
what monarch I should banish from his kingdom? I could slay even an immortal, were he 
your enemy; of what account, then, are men and women, who are mere worms as it were? 
You know my disposition, O beautiful lady; my mind is enamoured of your face as the 
Cakora bird is of the moon. O my beloved, my people and my family and all that I possess, 
my sons, nay, my life itself are all at your disposal. If I tell you anything insincerely, O good 
lady, I should be guilty of falsely swearing by Rama a hundred times. Ask with a cheerful 
countenance whatever pleases your mind and adorn your charming limbs with jewels. 
Distinguish within yourself between an opportune and inopportune hour and give up, my 
darling, this unbecoming attire at once.” (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


393 
On hearing this and considering the great oath the dull-witted Kaikeyi smilingly 
arose and began to put on her ornaments; it seemed as if a huntress was laying the trap 
at the sight of a deer. (26) 
Thinking her reconciled, the king spoke again in soft and winning accents his whole 
frame thrilling over with emotion, “Your heart’s desire, O good lady, is accomplished; every 
house in the city is a picture of joy and felicity. Tomorrow, I am installing Rama as the prince- 
regent; therefore, O bright-eyed dame, put on a festive garb.” The queen’s heart, hard though 
it was, cracked at these words; it seemed as if abscess quite ripe,hadunwarily touched had 
been unwarily touched. Even such (heart-rending) agony was disguised by her under the 
cloak of a smile. Just as a thief’s wife does not openly weep (on seeing her husband suffer 
punishment lest she should be made to share his lot). The king was unable to detect her wily 
designs, tutored as she was by a teacher (Manthara) who ranked foremost among millions 
of villains. Although the king was skilled in statesmanship, the ways of a woman are like an 
unfathomable ocean. Again, with a greater show of false affection she smilingly said with a 
graceful movement of her face and eyes: (1 — 4) 

“You do repeat the word ‘Ask, ask’, but never actually give anything. You 
promised me a couple of boons; but I am yet doubtful about their implementation.” (27) 

394 
“I have now understood the whole mystery,” said the king with a smile; “You are 
extremely fond of being angry. You kept the boons in reserve and never asked for 
them; as for myself, I forgot all about them, being oblivious by nature. Pray do not level 
a false charge against me; you might as well ask four boons instead of two. It has 
always been the rule with the race of Raghus that one’s plighted word must be 
redeemed even at the cost of one’s life. Even a multitude of sins cannot be matched 
with a lie. Can millions of tiny Gunja seeds ever stand comparison with a mountain? 
Veracity is the root of all noble virtues, as is well-known in the Vedas and Puranas and 
has been declared by Manu (the first law-giver of the world, the author of Manusmrti). 
Over and above this I have unwittingly sworn by Rama, the Lord of Raghus, who is 
the very perfection of virtue and the highest embodiment of affection.” Having thus 
bound him to his word the evil-minded queen smilingly said, removing as it were the 
cap from the eyes of her hawk-like plot.* (1 — 4) 
The king’s desire (to see Rama installed as the prince-regent of Ayodhya) 
represented a lovely grove and the joy (that prevailed everywhere) stood for a host of 
charming birds. Queen Kaikeyi, who resembled a Bhila woman, sought to release a 
fierce falcon in the form of her piercing words. (28) 


* Fowlers who maintain a hawk with them generally keep its eyes covered by a leather cap so that it may not attack any and every bird it sees indiscriminately, and uncover its eyes only when they intend it to attack its prey. 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


395 

 “Hear, my beloved lord, that which pleases my heart; vouchsafe to me for one 
boon the installation of Bharata (as the prince-regent of Ayodhya). And for the second 
boon I ask with joined palms — pray accomplish my desire, my lord: let Rama dwell in the 
woods for fourteen years in the garb of a hermit and wholly detached from the world.” 
The king was grieved at heart to hear these gentle words even as a Cakravaka bird is 
filled with agony at the mere touch of a moonbeam. He felt dismayed and could not utter 
a word, like a partridge in the woods at the swoop of a falcon. The king turned altogether 
pale as a palm tree struck by lightning; with his hands to his forehead and closing both 
his eyes he began to mourn like Grief personified. “The celestial tree of my desire, that 
had already blossomed, has been torn up with its roots by the elephant-like Kaikeyi just 
when it was about to bear fruit. She has desolated Ayodhya and laid the foundation of 
everlasting misfortune.” (1 — 5) 
 “An inauspicious thing has happened at an auspicious moment; and I am 
doomed by putting trust in a woman like a striving Yogi who has been undone by 
nescience at a time when his practice of Yoga was just going to bear fruit in the form 
of Realization.” (29) 





396 

In this way the king moaned within himself. Seeing his bad plight the wicked queen sulked within her heart and said, “Is Bharata not your son? And have you bought me in consideration of money? If my words pierced you like arrows the moment they entered your ears, why should you not make promises after careful thought? Either say yes to my proposal or decline. You are true to your promise (more than anyone else) in the race of Raghu. Refuse the boons you promised me; abandon truth and court infamy in the world. Loud in your praise of truth you promised me a couple of boons, imagining of course that I would ask for a handful of parched grain. Sibi,* Dadhicit and Balit 

* King Sibi was noted for his piety and large-heartedness. Once upon a time the gods deputed Indra and Agni (the god of fire) to put his generosity to the test. Agni took the form of a pigeon and Indra appeared as a hawk. While the king was sitting in his court the pigeon flew into the hall and hid in his lap. The hawk too followed him; and while the pigeon sought his protection against the hawk, the latter insisted that the pigeon was its lawful spoil and should be made over to it. The king, who knew his duty, resolved to save the pigeon’s life at all costs; for as a true Ksatriya he could not betray one who had sought shelter with him. At the same time he recognized the validity of the hawk’s claim and did not want to rob it of food which it had fairly won and without which it would die of starvation. The king offered the hawk anything else that it chose to name; but the hawk would be satisfied with nothing short of an equal weight of the king’s own flesh. Scales were accordingly brought; and while the pigeon was put in one balance the king chopped his flesh with his own hands and put it in the other. But even though the monarch hacked and hewed large pieces of flesh from his muscular body, the pigeon outweighed them all. The king at last bodily mounted the balance and was just going to sever his head when Indra and Agni appeared in their own celestial forms, and interposed. They blessed the king and made him whole again. 

t When Indra and the other gods were hard pressed by the demon Vrtra, they approached Bhagavan 
Visnu and sought His protection. God Visnu told them that there was a great saint named Dadhlci practising penance in the Naimisa forest, and that if he would let them have his bones they could be made into weapon, before which no enemy could stand. Dadhlci, as soon as he heard what they wanted, gave up his ghost and out of his bones Visvakarma, the artisan of the gods, made a thunderbolt with which Indra easily dispatched Vrtra. 

t The demon-king Bali was so powerful that he acquired dominion over all the three worlds and ousted the gods from heaven. The mother of the gods, Aditi, prayed to Lord Visnu for relief and the latter was born as a son to Aditi in the form of a dwarf (Vamana). The dwarf appeared before Bali and as a Brahmana boy asked for alms. The demon-king promised to give him whatever He asked. Bhagavan Vamana said He wanted only as much land as could be measured in three strides. King Bali, who was noted for his generosity, granted the Brahmana’s request at once. The divine Dwarf now assumed colossal dimensions; in one stride 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


397 


redeemed their plighted word maintaining whatever they said even at the cost of their life 
and possessions.” In this way Kaikeyi uttered most pungent words as though applying 
salt to a burn. (1 — 4) 

A champion of righteousness, the king took courage and opened his eyes, and 
beating his head sighed out, “She has attacked me (created an em not to allow me 
anyway out of it) .” (30) 
He saw her standing before him burning with rage, as if it were Fury’s own sword 
drawn from the sheath, with a malicious mind for its hilt and remorselessness for its 
edge, whetted on the grindstone in the shape of the humpback (Manthara). The king saw 
that the sword was dreadful and inflexible and said to himself, “Is it really going to take 
my life?” Then, steeling his heart, he politely spoke to her in endearing terms, “My darling, 
why should you utter such unbecoming words, casting all confidence and affection to the 
winds, O timid lady? Bharata and Rama are my two eyes; I vouch for it calling Sankara 
as my witness. I will positively despatch a messenger at daybreak, and the two brothers 
(Bharata and Satrughna) will speedily come on hearing the message. Then, after fixing 
an auspicious date and making all preparations I will solemnly bestow the kingdom on 
Bharata.” (1 — 4) 

He measured the whole earth and covered heaven with another. 
For the third step Lord Vamana planted His foot on the blessed demon and sent him down to the subterranean region known by the name of Sutala, of which he became the sovereign. Won by his unique self-sacrifice and adherence to truth Bhagavan Vamana ever waits as a porter at his door. King Bali will be installed as Indra in the next Manvantara. 





398 



“Rama has no greed of sovereignty and is deeply attached to Bharata. I was only 
going to follow the usage obtaining among the princes, considering the seniority and 
juniority of the two princes.” (31) 
 “I sincerely tell you, swearing by Rama a hundred times, that his mother 
(Kausalya) never said a word to me in this connection. No doubt I arranged everything 
without consulting you and that is why my cherished desire has not been realized. Now 
give up your anger and put on a festal garb; a few days hence Bharata will be the prince- 
regent. Only one thing has caused me pain; the second boon that you have asked for 
is something incongruous. My heart is still burning with the agony caused by it. Is it anger 
or jest, or is it all really true? Tell me with a cool mind Sri Rama’s guilt; everybody says 
Rama is extremely well-behaved. You too spoke well of him and loved him. Hearing now 
what you have asked, I have begun to suspect (whether your profession of love was 
genuine). How could he whose temperament was congenial even to an enemy act 
contrary to the will of his own mother?” 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


399 
“No more of jesting or anger, my darling; make a reasonable and thoughtful 
request, so that I may now regale my eyes on the sight of Bharata’s installation on the 
throne.” (32) 

“A fish may rather survive even without water and a serpent may drag on a 
miserable and wretched existence without the gem in its head. But I tell you sincerely 
with a guileless heart that I cannot live without Rama. Be assured in your mind, my wise 
darling, that my very existence depends on the sight of Sri Rama.” Hearing these soft 
words the evil-minded queen blazed up like the fire on which has fallen an oblation of 
clarified butter. She said, “You might as well try millions of devices; but your stratagem 
shall not avail with me. Either grant my request or earn a bad reputation by refusing it; 
I am not fond of much wiles. Rama is virtuous, you too are virtuous and wise and no less 
virtuous is Rama’s mother (Kausalya); I have known all of you. I will repay with a 
vengeance the benefit she has sought to confer upon me.” (1 — 4) 
 “If Rama does not retire to the woods assuming the garb of a hermit as soon as 
the day breaks, death for me and ill-repute for you will be the result; bear this in mind, 
O king.” (33) 

400 
So saying, the wicked woman rose and stood up as though it were a swollen 
stream of fury that had issued from the mountain of sin and, overflowing with the water 
of anger, was too terrible to look at. The two boons she had asked for represented its 
banks, her inexorable obstinacy corresponded to its (swift) current and the impelling 
force of Manthara’s words stood for its eddies; uprooting the king like a tree the river 
headed towards the ocean of adversity. The king now perceived that the demand of the 
queen was really true, and that it was death itself which was dancing over his head in 
the disguise of his own consort. Clasping her feet he persuaded her to sit down and 
implored her, “Pray do not play the axe with respect to the solar race. Ask of me my 
own head and I will forthwith give it to you; but kill me not by tearing Rama from me. 
Retain Rama by any means whatsoever, or your bosom will burn with anguish all your 
life.” (1—4) 


401 

The king was stricken with grief and his limbs began to droop; it looked as if a wish- 
yielding tree had been knocked down by a female elephant. His throat was dry and 
speech failed his lips; he felt miserable like a fish out of water. Kaikeyi plied him once 
more with pungent and harsh words, injecting poison as it were into his wound, “If this 
was what you intended doing in the long run, what emboldened you to say ‘Ask, ask’? 
Can both these things happen at the same time, O sovereign of the earth — to laugh a 
boisterous laugh and to look grave, to enjoy the reputation of being generous and yet be 
stingy? Is it possible to remain unscathed while playing the hero? Either go back upon 
your word or forbear; pray do not wail like a woman. Life and wife, sons, home, wealth 
and land have been spoken of as no better than a straw in the eyes of a man who is 
true to his word.” (1 — 4) 
On hearing these poignant words the king exclaimed, “Say what you will; you are 
not to blame for it. It is my doom which has possessed you like a devil and is using you 
as its mouthpiece.” (35) 

402 
 “Bharata would never covet sovereignty even unwittingly. By the decree of fate, 
however, evil counsel has taken possession of your mind. All that is the outcome of my 
sins, due to which the tide has turned against me at an inopportune moment. Beautiful 
Ayodhya shall flourish again under the sovereignty of Rama, the abode of all virtues. All 
his brothers shall serve him and his fame shall spread through all the three spheres of 
creation. The stain on your reputation and my remorse shall not disappear even after our 
death and shall never go till eternity. Now do whatever pleases you; only keep out of my 
sight hiding your face. So long as I live, I beseech you with joined palms, pray speak 
not a word to me again. You will repent in the end, O hapless woman, that you killed a 
cow for the sake of gut.” (1 — 4) 


Thus arguing with her in numberless way the king dropped on the ground crying. “Why do you bring ruin to all?” But a pastmaster in wiles the queen did not utter a word as though busy in prpraley avilsprit in a crematorium (to acquire control over ghosts). (36) Stricken with grief the king repeated the word ‘Rama’ again and again and felt miserable like a bird that has been shorn of its wings. He prayed in his heart, “May the day never dawn nor may anyone go and tell Rama. Rise not, O sun-god, the progenitor of Raghu’s race; for you will be pained at heart to see the plight of Ayodhya.” The king’s affection and the relentlessness of Kaikeyi both were the highest of their kind in God’s 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


403 


creation. While the king was yet wailing, the day broke and the music of lute, flute and 
conch was heard at his door. Bards extolled him and minstrels sang his praises; they, 
however, pierced the king like shafts as he heard them. These and other tokens of 
rejoicing pleased him not even as ornaments repel a widow who has decided to 
accompany her deceased husband to the other world. None could have a wink of sleep 
that night since everyone was eagerly longing for a sight of Sri Rama. (1 — 4) 
At the door waited a crowd of servants and ministers, who said to one another at 
the sight of the risen sun, “The Lord of Ayodhya has not yet woken up, what special 
reason can there be?” (37) 


“The king used to wake up during the last watch of the night everyday; his 

behaviour today appears most strange to us. Getting into the palace, O Sumantra, you 
go and rouse him; on receiving his orders we may proceed with our work.” Sumantra 
then entered the gynaeceum; but it wore such a dismal appearance that he was afraid 
to advance. It looked like a monster that would spring on him and devour him; its sight 
was so repelling. It seemed to be the very abode of calamity and sorrow. Since nobody 
answered his questions he proceeded to the apartment where the king and Queen 
Kaikeyi were. Greeting the king with the salutary words “Jaya Jivan!” and bowing his head, 
he sat down. He turned pale to behold the condition of the king, who lay on the ground 
distracted with grief and colourless like a lotus stalk torn from its roots. The minister being 
too alarmed to ask any question, Kaikeyi, who was full of evil and void of all good, broke 
the silence. (1 — 4) 




404 

 “The king had no sleep last night: Heaven alone knows the reason. He has been 
simply repeating “Rama, Rama” till daybreak and refuses to disclose the secret.” (38) 
“Therefore, call on Rama and bring him soon; thereafter, when you have come 
back, you may ask further details.” Judging (from his master’s looks) that the king 
approved of this idea, Sumantra left; he concluded that the queen had contrived some 
evil design. He felt so distressed with anxiety that his legs refused to move ahead. “What 
will the king speak to Rama after calling him?” he wondered. Recovering himself he 
repaired to the gate; and seeing him disconsolate all began to question him. He, however, 
reassured them all and proceeded to the apartment where the Ornament of the solar race 
(Sri Rama) was. When Sri Rama saw Sumantra coming, He received him with honour, 
treating the minister on an equal footing with His father. Looking Sri Rama in the face, 
Sumantra conveyed to Him the royal command and returned with the Light of Raghu’s 
race (Sri Rama). Sri Rama followed the minister in an unbecoming manner: people here 
and there were grieved to see this. (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


405 

Chapter 64
The Jewel of Raghu’s race went and saw the king in an utterly wretched state like 
an aged elephant who had dropped down in terror at the sight of a lioness. (39) 
His lips got parched and his whole frame burned; he looked like a helpless snake 
bereft of the gem. The Lord beheld by the side of His father angry Kaikeyi, who stood 
there like Death personified counting the last minutes of his life. Sri Rama was 
compassionate and soft by nature; He witnessed sorrow for the first time in His life, He 
had never heard of it before. Yet, recovering Himself as the occasion demanded, 
addressed His step-mother in the following sweet words, “Tell me, dear mother, the 
cause of my father’s distress, so that an attempt may be made to remove it.” “Listen, 
Rama; the sole cause is this: the king is very fond of you. He had promised me two 
boons of my choice and I asked whatever I liked. The king, however, was stricken with 
grief to hear my requests; for he cannot shake off the hesitation on your score.” (1 — 4) 
 “Love for his son on one side and his plighted word on the other: The king is 
placed on the horns of a dilemma. Obey his command if you can, and rid him of a severe 
mental torture.” (40) 
406 

Chapter 65
Kaikeyi unhesitatingly spoke these pungent words, which callousness itself was 
sore distressed to hear. With the tongue for a bow, and words for so many shafts and 
with the king for a delicate target as it were, it looked as hard heartedness had assumed 
the form of a great hero and practised bowmanship. Having communicated the whole 
incident to the Lord of Raghus (Sri Rama). She sat like the very incarnation of 
heartlessness. The Sun of the solar dynasty, Sri Rama, the natural fountain of joy, smiled 
within Himself and spoke words which were free from all blemish and were so sweet and 
agreeable that they seemed to be the very ornaments of speech; “Listen, mother: That 
son alone is blessed, who is devoted to the words of his parents. A son who gratifies his 
father and mother is rare in this whole world, mother.” (1 — 4) 
 “In the forest I shall get more opportunities of meeting hermits, which will be 
beneficial to me in everyway. On top of it I have my father’s command and your approval 
to boot, mother.” (41) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


407 

 “Again, Bharata, who is dear to me as life, will get the sovereignty: God is 
propitious to me in every respect today. If I refuse to proceed to the woods even under 
such circumstances, I should be reckoned foremost in an assembly of fools. Those who 
nurture a castor-oil plant leaving the tree of paradise and barter away nectar for poison, 
they too will not lose an opportunity like this should they ever get it: ponder this fact in 
your mind and realize it, mother. Only one thing pains me most, mother; I am grieved to 
see the king sore distressed. That my father should be so overwhelmed with grief over 
a trifling matter is more than I can believe, dear mother. The king is stout of heart and 
a fathomless ocean of goodness; I must have committed some great offence, which 
prevents the king from speaking out his mind to me. I adjure you, therefore, to tell me 
the truth.” (1—4) 
The words of Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghus) were artless and straight-forward, 
yet the evil-minded Kaikeyi took then to be otherwise. A leech must always move obliquely 
even though the water on which it moves has a smooth surface. (42) 

408 

The queen rejoiced to find Sri Rama acquiescing to her proposal and said with a 
false show of affection, “I swear by yourself and Bharata that no other cause of the king’s 
affliction is known to me. You are not supposed to do any offence, dear son, a source 
of delight that you are to your parents and brothers. What you say is all true; you are 
devoted to the words of your father and mother. I adjure you to argue with your father 
that he may not incur opprobrium in the evening of his life. It is hardly desirable for him 
to disregard the virtues (truthfulness etc.) that have fetched him a son like you.” These 
polite words adorned her detestable mouth even as sacred spots just as Gaya is situted 
in the accursed land of Magadha (South Bihar). All these words from His stepmother 
sounded pleasant to Rama in the same way as waters of all kinds are hallowed through 
their confluence with the holy Gahga. (1 — 4) 
The king’s spell of unconsciousness now left him; he remembered Rama and then changed sides. And the minister (Sumantra) informed him of Sri Rama’s arrival and made humble submission to him in words appropriate to the occasion. (43) 

Chapter 66

Hearing that Sri Rama had come, the king recovered himself and opened his eyes. 
The minister (Sumantra) helped his sovereign to a sitting posture, when the latter beheld 
Rama falling at his feet. Overwhelmed with emotion the king clasped Him to his bosom 
as though a serpent had regained its lost gem. The monarch kept gazing on Sri Rama 
and a torrent of tears streamed forth from his eyes. Overpowered with grief he could not 
utter a word and pressed the prince to his heart again and again. 
He inwardly prayed to God that the Lord of Raghus (Sri Rama) might not be able to proceed to the woods. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 

409 

Invoking the mighty Lord Siva he solicited Him saying, “Hear my prayer, O ever-blissful 
Lord! Quickly pleased and indiscreetly generous as You are, pray, relieve my affliction 
knowing me to be in distress. (1 — 4) 

“Dwelling as You do in the heart of all as the prompter of actions, so inspire Rama 
that he may flout my word and stay at home casting to the wind all sense of propriety 
and filial affection.” (44) 

“Let world-wide disrepute be my lot and let my good name perish; I would fain be 
damned to perdition and forgo heaven (the abode of immortals). Subject me to all severe 
hardships; but let not Rama be screened from my view.” The king thus prayed within his 
heart but did not open his lips; his mind quivered like an aspen leaf. Perceiving that His 
father was overpowered with affection, and apprehending that mother Kaikeyi might utter 
something again, the Lord of Raghus (Sri Rama) spoke after due deliberation, words 
which were not only humble but also suited to the place, time and circumstances. “Dear 
father, I make bold to submit something; pray forgive this impropriety on my part knowing 
that I am yet tender of age. You have suffered for a most trifling matter; and the pity of 
it is that nobody apprized me of it before. When I saw you I asked mother Kaikeyi, and 
was consoled to hear what she has told me.” (1 — 4) 

410 
 “Grieve not out of affection at a time of rejoicing, dear father, and command me 
with a glad heart.” The Lord felt a thrill of joy all over his body as He spoke these 
words. (45) 
“Blessed is his birth on the surface of this earth, whose father is rejoiced to hear 
of his doings. He has in his hand all the four prizes of life, (viz., religious merit, material 
riches, sensuous gratification and final beatitude), to whom his parents are dear as life. 
After carrying out your order and having obtained the reward of my life I shall come back 
soon; therefore be pleased to command me. In the meantime I shall ask leave of mother 
Kausalya and return forthwith; then I shall proceed to the woods after throwing myself 
once more at your feet.” So spoke Sri Rama and then departed; while the king was too 
overpowered with grief to make any answer. This most unwelcome news spread 
throughout the city as though the sting of a scorpion had circulated its poison throughout 
the body. Every man and woman who heard this was distressed even as trees and 
creepers are blasted at the very sight of a forest fire. Whoever heard it beat his head 
wherever he happened to be; the grief was too great to be borne. (1 — 4) 

Their mouths were parched, their eyes streamed and their heart could not contain 
their sorrow; it seemed as though the army of Pathos had openly pitched its camp at 
Ayodhya. (46) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


411 
 “When everything was ready, God upset the whole plan!” Everywhere people 
abused Kaikeyi. “What sense could there be in this wicked woman having set fire to a 
house that had been newly thatched! She seeks to perceive after tearing out her eyes 
with her own hands, and wishes to taste poison throwing away nectar. This crooked 
hard-hearted and evil-minded wretch has appeared as fire to burn the cluster of bamboos 
in the shape of Raghu’s race. Sitting on a twig she has hewn the tree itself; in the midst 
of joy she has raised a structure of sorrow. Sri Rama had always been dear to her as 
life: What has led her to resort to such perversity? Seers have truly said that a woman’s 
mind is altogether incomprehensible, unfathomable and shrouded in mystery. Sooner man 
may catch his own reflection but to know the ways of a woman is impossible. (1 — 4) 
 “What is there that fire cannot consume; what is there that cannot be engulfed by 
the ocean? What is there that a powerful woman, miscalled powerless (Abala) in 
common parlance, cannot accomplish and what creature is there in this perishable world, 
that death cannot devour?” (47) 


412 

 “Having first ordained one thing the Creator has now ordained quite the reverse 
of it; having shown us one spectacle he would now show us quite another.” Some people 
said, “The king has not done well; he has not been discreet in granting the wicked 
woman her request, whereby he has wilfully courted all this tragedy. By allowing himself 
to be ruled by a woman he has lost his wisdom and goodness as it were.” Others who 
were saner did not blame the king, recognizing as they did his high standard of morality. 
They repeated at length to one another the narratives of Sibi, Dadhici and Hariscandra*. 
Some suggested Bharata’s connivance, while still others passively heard what their 
companions said. Others stopped their ears with their hands and bit their tongue as they 
exclaimed, “This is untrue. All your merits will be destroyed as you utter these words: 
Sri Rama is dear to Bharata as his own life.” (1 — 4) 
 “Sooner shall the moon rain sparks of fire or nectar have the same effect as poison 
than Bharata ever dream of doing anything prejudicial to the interests of Sri Rama.” (48) 


* Hariscandra, son of Trisahku, was a king of Ayodhya and the twenty-eighth in descent from Iksvaku,the founder of the solar dynasty. In order to satisfy the claims of the sage Visvamitra, who wanted to test his integrity, he parted with his kingdom and all that he had, sold his wife and only son and hired himself out as the employee of a pariah who kept a burning Ghata. Whenever a dead body was brought for cremation there, Hariscandra used to recover the toll and make it over to his master. One day it so happened that a snake bit his only son, Rohita, and the ex-queen brought the dead prince for cremation to the same Ghata. Even though the ex-king recognized them to be his own wife and child, he would not allow the child to be burnt without recovering the usual toll. At last the penniless woman offered to part with the rag with which she had covered her shame and the heartless ex-monarch was going to strip her naked when the gods interposed and restored the pious king to his throne and all his former prosperity. 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


413 

Some blamed the Creator, who had offered nectar but actually given them poison. 
The whole city was astir and everyone felt distressed. There was deep agony in their 
heart and their briskness was gone. Brahmana matrons and other venerable and elderly 
ladies of the royal family and such other ladies as were most dear to Kaikeyi began to 
expostulate with her praising her amiability; but their words pierced her like shafts. “You 
have always said, and the whole world knows it, that Bharata is not so dear to you as 
Rama. You have borne natural affection towards Rama; for what offence do you exile 
him to the woods today? You have never harboured jealousy towards your co-wives; 
your loving disposition and credulity are known throughout the land. What wrong has 
Kausalya done to you now due to which you should have hurled this thunderbolt against 
the whole city. (1 — 4) 
“Will Sita forgo the company of Sri Rama or Laksmana choose to stay at 
home? Will Bharata enjoy the sovereignty of Ayodhya or the king survive without 
Rama? (49) 

414 
 “Pondering thus banish anger from your breast nor make yourself a storehouse of 
grief and infamy. By all means instal Bharata as the Prince-Regent; but what need is 
there for exiling Rama to the forest? Rama is not covetous of sovereignty; he is a 
champion of righteousness and has no relish for sensuous pleasures. Let Rama 
abandon his home and live with his preceptor; ask this of the king as your second boon. 
In case you do not follow our advice, you will gain nothing. If you have only played some 
joke, let us know by openly declaring it. Does a son like Rama deserve to be exiled to 
the woods? What will the world say about you when they hear of it? Up quickly and 
devise some means to avert grief and obloquy.” (1 — 4) 
 “Devise some means to avert grief and infamy and save your family. Forcibly 
dissuade Rama from proceeding to the woods and make no other suggestion. As the day 
without the sun, as the body without life and the night without the moon, so the city of 
Ayodhya without the Lord of Tulasldasa, Sri Rama! just consider this, O irascible lady.” 
The advice that Kaikeyi’s friends gave her was agreeable to hear and salutary in 
consequence. But she gave no ear to it, tutored as she was by the mischievous 
humpback. (50) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


415 

She gave no reply and wore a sullen look due to anger that could not be easily 
curbed. She stared at them as a hungry tigress would gaze on a herd of does. Finding 
her disease incurable, her friends left her saying as they went, ‘Wretched fool ! Fate could 
not brook her sovereignty and has betrayed her. She has done what nobody else would 
do.” Men and women of the city thus lamented and showered numberless abuses on the 
wicked woman. They burned with terrible agony and sighed. “There can be no hope of 
life without Rama,” they said. The people were disconcerted at the thought of long 
separation even as aquatic creatures get disturbed when water in which they live begins 
dry. Men and women alike were overcome with excessive grief. In the meantime Lord Sri 
Rama called on His mother (Kausalya). He wore a cheerful look and had fourfold joy in 
his heart; He no longer feared lest the king should detain him. (1 — 4) 
The mind of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s race) resembled a young elephant 
(newly caught) with kingship for its chain. When He heard of the proposal for exiling Him 
to the forest He took Himself as freed and felt overjoyed in His heart. (51) 


416 
Chapter 67

The Crown of Raghu’s race, Sri Rama, joined both His palms and cheerfully bowed 
His head at His mother’s feet. She blessed Him and clasped Him to her bosom and 
scattered jewels and raiment around Him (in order to protect Him from evil). The mother 
kissed Him again and again with tears of affection in her eyes and her limbs thrilling over 
with joy. Seating Him in her lap she pressed Him once more to her heart, while milk flowed 
from her graceful breasts due to excess of love. Her affection and joy were altogether 
beyond description; it seemed as if a pauper had attained the position of Kubera (the god 
of riches). Fondly regarding His lovely countenance the mother spoke to Him in endearing 
terms; “Tell me, dear child — I beseech you; — when will be that delightful and auspicious 
hour, the beautiful culmination of piety, virtue and joy and the highest reward of human 
birth,—” (1—4) 
— “And for which all men and women long as anxiously as a thirsty pair of Cataka 
birds for an autumnal shower during the brief period when the sun is in the same 
longitude as the constellation named Svati (the Arcturus)? (52) 

* AYODHYA-KANDA * 41 7 

“I adjure you, my darling, to bathe quickly and take some sweet dish of your choice. 
See your father after that, my boy; for I protest it is already too late.” Even on hearing 
these most agreeable words of His mother, which were blossoms as it were, of the 
celestial tree of affection, laden with the honey of joy and fountains of worldly prosperity, 
the bee of Sri Rama’s mind could not be lured by their charm. A champion of 
righteousness that He was, He clearly discerned the path of duty and spoke to His mother 
in exceedingly polite terms. “Father has bestowed on me the kingdom of the forest, where 
there will be great opportunities for me in everyway. Therefore, grant me leave with a 
cheerful heart, so that my journey to the forest may be attended with joy and blessing. 
Be not obsessed with erroneous fears due to affection, dear mother; by your goodwill I 
shall be ever happy.” (1 — 4) 

 “Spending four years and ten in the forest and having obeyed father’s commands 
I will come back and behold your feet again; be not sad at heart.” (53) 

The gentle and sweet words of Sri Rama (the Chief of the Raghus) pierced the 
mother’s heart and rankled there. Alarmed to hear His serene speech she turned pale in 
the same way as the Yavasaka plant is blasted by a shower in the monsoon. The agony 
of her heart was beyond description like that of a doe that has heard a lion’s roar. Her 
eyes were wet with tears and her body violently shook like a fish that had got inebriated 
by sucking the scum raised by the first monsoon shower. Recovering herself and looking 
her son in the face the mother spoke in faltering accents, “My boy, you are dear as life 
to your father, to whom it is a constant delight to watch your day to day doings from . 

418 
He had got an auspicious day fixed for installing you as the prince-regent; for what offence 
has he asked you to proceed to the woods? Let me know the reason, my darling; who 
is it that has served as fire to consume the solar race?” (1 — 4) 
Reading in Sri Rama’s eyes His tacit consent Sumantra’s son (who had obviously 
accompanied the Prince) explained the reason. The mother was struck dumb as it were to hear the episode; the state of her mind I could not be described in words. (54) 
She could neither detain her Son nor yet say ‘Go’; she felt terrible agony in her 
heart in either event. “It seemed as though one was going to write ‘moon’ and wrote 
‘Rahu’ (the demon who is believed by the Hindus to devour the moon during a lunar 
eclipse) instead through a slip of the pen,” she said to herself. “The ways of the Creator 
(Brahma) are always adverse to all,” she concluded. Kausalya’s judgment was swayed 
on the one hand by her sense of duty and on the other by her affection. She found herself 
on the horns of a dilemma like a snake that has caught hold of a musk-rat*. “If I press 
my son and detain him, the moral code will be violated and bad blood created between 
brothers. And if I allow him to proceed to the woods, it will be a grievous loss.” The queen 
thus found herself faced with an embarrassing situation and was overwhelmed with grief. 
Again, realizing the duty of a woman and remembering that both Rama and Bharata were 


* It is popularly believed in India that if a snake once catches hold of a musk-rat mistaking it for an ordinary rat and latter discovers its identity, it can neither devour it nor disgorge it. For if it devours it, it is sure to die; and if it disgorges it, it goes blind. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
419 


equally her sons the prudent Kausalya (Sri Rama’s mother), who had a guileless 
disposition, spoke as follows with great courage, “You have done well, my child, I swear; 
a father’s command is the most sacred of all obligations.” (1 — 4) 
 “That having promised to bestow on you the kingdom of Ayodhya your father has 
now decided to exile you to the woods does not make me the least sorry. But your 
absence from our midst will mean a terrible ordeal to Bharata, to the king himself and to 
the people.” (55) 
 “In any case if it be your father’s command alone, my boy, then go not, remembering 
that a mother ranks higher than one’s father. If, on the other hand, both father and mother 
have asked you to proceed to the woods then, of course, the forest will equal a hundred cities like Ayodhya, with the sylvan gods for your father, the sylvan goddesses for your mother and the birds and beasts to wait upon your lotus feet. At all events it is but proper for a king to dwell in a forest in the evening of his life; it is your tender age which fills my heart 
with agony. How blessed is the forest and how luckless Ayodhya, that will be deserted by 
you, O crown of Raghu’s line! If I ask you, my boy, to take me with you, your mind will be filled with doubt. You are supremely dear to all, my child; you are the life of our life, the vitality of our soul. As such you say, “Mother, I go to the forest!” while I remain rooted to my seat even on hearing these words and repent. (1 — 4) 


420 
 “Realizing this I do not press my suit exaggerating my false love. I only pray that 
remembering me as a mother you should not allow me to slip out of your mind.” (56) 
 “May all the gods and manes protect you, O lord of the earth, as the eyelids protect 
the eyes. The term of exile is like water, while your near and dear ones resemble the fish 
that live on it; as for yourself you are a fountain of mercy and a champion of virtue. 
Remembering this please devise some means to see that you come back in time to find 
them all alive. I adjure you to proceed to the woods in good cheer abandoning your 
servants, family and the whole city. The fruit of everyone’s meritorious deeds is exhausted 
today and the tide of fortune has turned against us, assuming a sullen aspect.” Thus wailing 
in many ways mother Kausalya clung to Sri Rama’s feet accounting herself the most 
unlucky woman. Her heart was filled with terrible and deep agony and the profusion of 
wailings was beyond all description. Sri Rama lifted His mother and pressed her to His 
bosom, and then comforted her with soothing words. (1 — 4) 

Chapter 68
That very moment Sita heard the news and rose in great agitation. She approached 
Her mother-in-law, reverenced her lotus feet and sat down bowing Her head. (57) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


421 

The mother-in-law blessed Her in gentle accents and felt distressed when she 
regarded Her most delicate frame. With Her head bent low Slta, who was beauty 
personified and cherished unalloyed love towards Her Lord, sat reflecting, “The lord of 
my life would depart to the forest; it has yet to be seen who will have the good fortune 
to accompany Him — my body and soul together or my soul alone. What God intends 
to do cannot be foreseen even partly.” As She scratched the ground with the lovely 
nails of Her toes, Her anklets produced a musical sound, as if — so declare the poets — 
they lovingly prayed that Sita’s feet may never abandon them. Seeing Her shed tears 
from Her charming eyes, Sri Rama’s mother broke the silence: “Listen, my dear child: 
Sita is exceedingly delicate and the pet of her father-in-law and mothers-in-law and the 
whole family.” (1 — 4) 
 “She has for her father Janaka, the jewel among princes, while her father-in-law 
is no other than the sun of the solar race (your father); as for her lord (yourself), he 
is a veritable moon for the lily-like progeny of the sun-god and a repository of goodness 
and beauty.” (58) 


422 
 “Again I have found in her a beloved daughter-in-law, who is amiable and 
accomplished, and beauty personified. I have treated her as the very apple of my eye 
and loved her ever more; nay, my very life is centred in Janaki. I have fostered her in 
many ways as a celestial creeper and nourished her by feeding her with the water of 
affection. Just when the creeper was about to blossom and bear fruit God turned against 
me and there is no knowing what will be the consequence. Borne invariably on a 
bedstead, seat, swing or my own lap Sita has never set her foot on hard ground. I have 
been tending her like a life-giving herb and never ask her even to stir the wick of a lamp. 
The same Sita would accompany you to the woods, and awaits your orders, O Lord of 
the Raghus! How can a female Cakora bird, who loves to feed on the nectar borne on 
the rays of the moon, bear to fix her gaze on the sun?” (1 — 4) 
 “Hosts of wild elephants, lions, demons and other fell creatures roam about in the 
woods. Can a beautiful life-giving herb fit in with a poison-wood, my boy?” (59) 


AYODHYA-KANDA 


423 

“For residing in the forest God has created Kola* and Kirata* girls, who are foreign 
to sensuous pleasures. Adamantine by nature like the insect living on stone, they never 
experience any hardship in the woods. Another class fit for the forest are the hermit 
women, who have renounced all pleasures for the sake of penance. But how, my son, 
will Sita live in the forest; — she who is frightened to see even the picture of a monkey? 
Is a female cygnet, who disports in the lovely lotus-beds of the Manasa lake, fit for a 
muddy puddle? First ponder this; then as you order I will instruct Janaka’s daughter. “If 
she stays at home,” the mother continued, “that will mean a great solace to me.” When 
Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s race) heard this endearing speech of His mother, imbued 
as it were with the nectar of grace and affection — (1 — 4) 
He comforted her by addressing tender and wise words to her; and then He 
started admonishing Janaki by disclosing to Her the advantages and disadvantages of 
forest life. (60) 


The names of two well-known hilly tribes. 




424 


Even though He hesitated in speaking to Her in the presence of His mother, He realized within Himself the emergency of the situation and said, “Listen to my advice, O princess, and do not misunderstand me. If you wish well of me as well as of yourself, please accept my suggestion and stay at home. You will be obeying my order and rendering service to your mother-in-law; by remaining at home, O good lady, you will be benefited in everyway. For a woman there is no other duty more sacred than reverently adoring the feet of her husband’s parents. Whenever my mother thinks of me and feeling disconsolate due to her love for me loses her balance of mind, do you console her, my love, with soothing words by narrating old legends to her. I tell you sincerely and solemnly; it is for my mother’s sake, O charming lady, that I leave you here.” (1 — 4) 
 “(By staying at home in deference to my wishes) you will easily obtain the 
reward of virtue approved of by one’s elders and the Vedas; whereas by giving 
themselves over to obduracy the sage Galava,* King Nahusat and all others suffered 
great hardships.” (61) 

*Galava was a pupil of the celebrated sage Visvamitra. When he was about to leave his Guru after completing his studies, he requested the latter to ask something by way of the preceptor’s fee (Gurudaksina). 
Visvamitra would ask nothing; but Galava persisted in importuning him. At last, in order to get rid of his obstinate student, the sage Visvamitra ordered him to get for him a thousand snow-white horses with dark ears. Galava had to experience a good deal of trouble in procuring this rare breed of horses. 

t King Nahusawasapious and illustrious ruler. When Indra, the lord of paradise, slew the demon Vrtra (who was a Brahmana by birth) he incurred the sin of having killed a Brahmana and out of shame hid himself in the Manasarovara lake. Finding themselves without a king the gods installed King Nahusa on the throne of Indra and proclaimed him as their ruler. Nahusa once beheld Indra’s wife and, enamoured of her beauty, longed to take her to wife. Sacf, who was noted for her fidelity to her husband, did not approve of Nahusa’s overtures and approached the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of gods) for protection. The gods and sages thereupon expostulated with Nahusa and tried to dissuade him but in vain. According to Brhaspati’s advice Sacf then offered to accept Nahusa as her husband if the latter rode to her on a palanquin carried by sages. 
Nahusa, who was blinded by passion and was bent on having her as his wife at all costs, gladly agreed and prevailed on the sages to carry him on their shoulders. As the sages, who got tired very soon, were proceeding rather slowly, Nahusa spurred them on and while doing so kicked the sage Agastya and the latter pronounced a curse upon him that he should take the form of a python. 




* AYODHYA-KANDA * 425 
 “As for myself listen, 0 fair and sensible lady: I will soon return after redeeming 
my father’s word. Days will steal away quickly; therefore, heed my advice, O charming 
lady. If on the other hand, you persist in your obstinacy due to your affection for me, O 
pretty one, you will eventually come to grief. The forest is rugged and most dreadful with 
its terrible heat, cold, rain and blasts. The tracks are beset with prickly grass and thorns 
and stones of various kinds and you will have to tread them without any shoes. Your lotus- 
like feet are delicate and lovely, while the paths are most difficult and intercepted by huge 
mountains, caves and chasms, streams, rivers and rivulets that are unapproachable, 
unfathomable and terrible to look at. Bears and tigers, wolves, lions and elephants raise 
such a cry as staggers one’s presence of mind.” (1 — 4) 
 “The ground will be your couch and the bark of trees, your raiment; while bulbs, 
fruits and roots will be your food. And do you think even these latter will be available to 
you all the year round? You will get everything according to its season.” (62) 


426 
 “Man-eating demons roam about in the woods and assume all sorts of deceptive 
forms. The water of the hills is exceedingly unwholesome; the hardships of the forest 
are beyond all description. There are terrible serpents and fierce wild birds and 
multitudes of demons who steal both man and woman. The boldest shudder at the very 
thought of the forest; while you, O fawn-eyed lady, are timid by nature. You are not fit 
for the woods, O fair lady; the world will revile me when they hear that I am taking you 
to the forest. Can a female cygnet who has been brought up in the nectarean water of 
the Manasa lake, live in the salt water of the ocean? Can a cuckoo that has made merry 
in a young mango grove, have its appropriate place in a thicket of Karila bushes? 
Pondering this in your heart stay at home, O moon-faced lady; the hardships of the 
forest are great.” (1 — 4) 
 “He who does not reverently follow the advice of a disinterested friend, preceptor 
and master has to repent fully at heart and surely harms himself.” (63) 
When Sita heard these soft and winning words of Her beloved lord, Her lovely 
eyes filled with tears. His soothing advice proved as scorching to Her as a moon-lit 
autumnal night to a female Cakravaka bird. Videha’s Daughter could make no answer. 
She was filled with agony to think that Her pious and loving lord would leave Her behind. 
Perforce restraining Her tears Earth’s Daughter took courage and throwing Herself at 
Her mother-in-law’s feet spoke to her with Her two palms joined together, “Forgive, 
O venerable lady, my great impudence. The lord of my life has tendered me only such 
advice as is conducive to my best interests. I have, however, pondered within myself 
and realized that there is no calamity in this world as great as being torn away from one’s 
beloved lord.” (1 — 4) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


427 

 “O lord of my life, O abode of mercy, handsome, genial and wise, O moon for the 
lily-like race of Raghu, without you heaven would be as obnoxious as hell.” (64) 
 “Father and mother, sisters and dear brothers, beloved kinsmen and friends, 
father-in-law and mother-in-law, preceptor and relatives, allies and even sons, however 
good-looking, well-behaved and congenial — nay, whatever ties of affection and kinship 
there exist — to a woman bereft of her beloved lord they are far more tormenting than the 
scorching sun. Life, riches, house, land, city and kingdom — all these are mere 
accoutrements of woe to a woman bereft of her lord. Luxury to her is loathsome like a 
disease and ornaments a burden; while the world is like the torments of hell. Without you, 
O lord of my life, nothing in this world is delightful to me. As the body without a soul, and 
a river without water, even so, my lord, is a woman without her husband. In your 
company, my lord, I shall be happy in everyway so long as I behold your countenance 
resembling the cloudless moon of an autumnal night.” (1 — 4) 
 “Birds and beasts will be my kindred; the forest, my city and the bark of trees, my 




428 


spotless robes. And a hut of leaves in the company of my lord will be as comfortable as 
the abode of gods.” (65) 
 “The generous-hearted sylvan gods and goddesses will take care of me like my 
own father-in-law and mother-in-law. A charming litter of grass and tender leaves will in 
the company of my lord vie with Cupid’s own lovely cushion. Bulbs, roots and fruits will 
be my ambrosial food; while mountains will be as good as a hundred royal mansions of 
Ayodhya. Gazing on the lotus feet of my lord every moment I shall remain as cheerful 
as a female Cakravaka bird during the daytime. You have mentioned a number of 
hardships and perils, woes and afflictions attendant with forest life; but all these put 
together will hardly compare with an iota of the pangs of separation from my lord, O 
fountain of mercy! Bearing this in mind, O crest-jewel of wise men, take me with you; 
pray do not leave me behind. I refrain from making a lengthy submission, my lord, 
knowing as I do that you are all-merciful and have access to the hearts of all.” (1 — 4) 
 “If you leave me in Ayodhya till the expiry of your exile, you may rest assured that 
I shall not survive, O friend of the afflicted, O handsome and congenial lord. O 
storehouse of amiability and affection!” (66) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


429 


“As I walk along the road I shall know no fatigue gazing on your lotus feet all the 
while. I shall render all sorts of service to my beloved lord (yourself) and shall relieve him 
of all the toil occasioned by the journey. Laving your feet and resting in the shade of a 
tree I shall fan you with a cheerful heart. Beholding your swarthy form bedewed with 
sweat and casting a look on the lord of my life I can have no occasion for grief. 
Spreading grass and leaves of trees on an even patch of ground this handmaid of yours 
will knead your feet overnight. Even as I gaze on your tender form again and again hot 
winds will have no effect on me. Who can dare look at me, when I am by the side of my 
lord, any more than a hare or jackal would regard a lioness? How true it is that I am 
delicate of body while my lord is fit to bear the hardships of a forest life, that it behoves 
you to undergo penance while it is worth while for me to loll in luxuries!” (1 — 4) 
 “When my heart did not resent even on hearing such cruel words, I am sure my 
wretched self shall live to bear the terrible pangs of separation from my lord!” (67) 




430 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 69

So saying Sita was overwhelmed with distress; she could not bear Her lord’s 
separation even in words. Seeing Her condition the Lord of Raghus was convinced in 
His heart of hearts that if left behind against Her will She would not survive. The all- 
merciful Lord of the solar race, therefore, said: “Give up lamentation and accompany me 
to the forest. Grief is out of season today. Prepare yourself for the journey to the woods 
at once.” Consoling His beloved Consort with these endearing words the Lord threw 
Himself at His mother’s feet and received her blessings. “Pray return soon and relieve 
the people’s distress and see that your heartless mother is not forgotten. Shall the tide 
of my fortune ever turn, O goodness, that I may behold the charming pair with my eyes 
again ? When, my dear son, will arrive the auspicious day and blessed hour that your 
mother shall live to see your moon-like countenance? (1 — 4 
 “When again shall I call you ‘my darling’, ‘my pet child’, ‘O Lord of Raghus’, ‘O 
Chief of Raghu’s race’, ‘my boy’, and summoning you clasp you to my bosom and gaze 
upon your limbs with delight?” (68) 



* AYODHYA-KANDA * 431 

Seeing that His mother was too overwhelmed with emotion to speak any more and 
was greatly agitated, Sri Rama consoled her in various ways; the gravity of the occasion 
and the intensity of affection was more than one could describe. Janaka’s Daughter then 
threw Herself at Her mother-in-law’s feet and said, “I tell you, mother: I am most unluckly 
in that at a time when I should have served you heaven has exiled me to the forest and 
has refused to grant my desire. Pray be not perturbed any more but at the same time 
cease not to entertain kindly feelings towards me. Relentless is fate and there is no fault 
of mine either.” The mother-in-law was so distressed to hear Slta’s words that I have no 
words to describe her condition. Again and again she pressed her Daughter-in-law to her 
breast and recovering herself admonished and blessed Her: “May the blessed state of 
your wifehood (the longevity of your husband) know no break and endure so long as the 
streams of the Gariga and Yamuna continue to flow.” (1 — 4) 
The mother-in-law blessed and admonished Sita in various ways and the 
latter parted from her, most affectionately bowing Her head at her lotus feet again and 
again. (69) 

Chapter 70
When Laksmana got the news he started up in confusion and ran with a doleful 
face. Trembling all over with his hair standing on end and eyes full of tears he clasped 
Sri Rama’s feet much excited with emotion. He was unable to speak and stood gazing 
piteously like a fish taken out of water. There was anxiety in his heart. “What is going 
to happen, O good heavens?” he said to himself. “All my joy and merits are over now. 
What will the Lord of Raghus command me to do? Will he leave me at home or take me 




432 

with him? “When Sri Rama saw His brother with joined palms having renounced his home 
and reckless about his own body, He addressed him in the following words, well-versed 
as He was in the rules of correct behaviour and an ocean of amiability, love, artlessness 
and joy: “Pray do not lose your balance of mind out of affection, dear brother, and be 
convinced in your heart of hearts that the end will be a happy one.” (1 — 4) 
 “Those who reverently and unconstrainedly follow the advice of their father and 
mother, preceptor and master have reaped the fruit of their birth or else their coming into 
this world has been in vain.” (70) 
“Bearing this in mind, brother, listen to my advice and wait upon the feet of our 
father and mothers. Bharata and Ripusudana (Satrughna) are not at home, while the king 
is aged and full of grief for my sake. If I proceed to the woods taking you with me, 
Ayodhya will be rendered completely masterless and the preceptor and parents, the 
people as well as the family, all will be subjected to a spell of terrible suffering. Stay, then, 
to comfort all; otherwise, brother, we shall incur great sin. A king whose reign brings 
suffering to his beloved people surely deserves an abode in hell. Bearing in mind this 
maxim, dear brother, stay at home.” Hearing this, Laksmana felt much distressed. He 
turned pale at these soothing words in the same way as a lotus is blasted when touched 
by frost. (1 — 4) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


433 

Overwhelmed with emotion he could not answer, but clasped his Brother’s feet 
in anguish, “My lord, I am your slave and you my master; if you abandon me, what 
help!” (71) 
 “My lord, you have given me a sound advice; but due to my faintheartedness it 
sounds impracticable to me. Only those noble men who are self-possessed and 
champion the cause of virtue, are fit to be taught the gospel of the Vedas and moral 
philosophy. I am a mere child fostered by your loving care; can a cygnet lift Mount 
Mandara or Meru? I know no preceptor nor father nor mother; I tell you sincerely; 
believe me, my lord. Whatever ties of affection, love and confidence exist in the world 
as declared by the Vedas — for me they are all centred in you and you alone, my lord. 
O friend of the afflicted, O knower of the innermost heart of all ! Piety and propriety 
should be taught to him who is fond of glory, fortune and a noble destiny. He, however, 
who is devoted to your feet in thought, word and deed — should he be abandoned, O 
ocean of grace?” (1 — 4) 
 

Hearing these soft and polite words of His noble brother, the all-compassionate 
Lord clasped him to His bosom and consoled him, perceiving that he had lost his nerve 
through love. (72) 




434 

Chapter 71
 “Go and ask leave of your mother; then quickly return and accompany me to the 
woods.” Laksmana rejoiced to hear these words from the Chief of Raghus; great was his 
gain and a mighty loss was averted. He went up to his mother delighted at heart as a 
blind man who had regained his lost vision. Approaching her he bowed his head at her 
feet, while his heart was with Sri Rama (the Delighter of Raghu’s race) and Janaka’s 
Daughter. Finding him depressed in spirit the mother inquired the reason, when Laksmana 
related at length the whole incident. Sumitra was shocked to hear this cruel report as a 
doe on finding wild fire all about her. Laksmana apprehended that things would take a 
wrong turn that day and that his mother would frustrate his plans due to her affection. 
He, therefore, felt nervous and hesitated in asking leave of her; for he thought within 
himself, “Good God, will she allow me to accompany Sri Rama or not?” (1 — 4) 
Remembering the beauty, amiability and noble disposition of Sri Rama and Sita 
and considering the king’s affection for Them, Sumitra beat her head as she perceived 
that the wicked queen (Kaikeyi) had played him foul. (73) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


435 



Perceiving that the time was unpropitious to them, she collected herself and, 
possessing as she did a naturally good heart, spoke in gentle words, “My dear son, 
Videha’s daughter is your mother while Rama, who loves you in everyway, is your 
father. Ayodhya is there where Rama dwells; there alone is the day where there is 
sunlight. If Sita and Rama are really proceeding to the woods, you have no business 
in Ayodhya. One’s preceptor, parents, brother, gods and master — all these should be 
tended as one’s own life. Rama, however is dearer than life, the soul of our soul and 
the disinterested friend of all. Whosoever are worthy of adoration and most dear to us 
should be accounted as such only in so far as they are related to Rama. Bearing this 
in mind, accompany him to the forest and derive, my boy, the benefit of your existence 
in the world. (1 — 4) 
 “It is your great good fortune as well as mine, I solemnly declare, that your mind 
has sincerely taken up its abode in Rama’s feet.” (74) 
436 
 “That woman alone can be said to have borne a male issue, whose son is a devotee of Rama (the Lord of Raghus). Otherwise she had better remain issueless; for she who deems herself fortunate in having a son hostile to Rama has yeaned in vain. It is due to your good fortune that Rama is proceeding to the forest; there is no other ground for his doing so, my boy. The highest reward of all meritorious acts is verily this — to have spontaneous love for the feet of Sita and Rama. Never give way even in a dream to passion, anger, jealousy, arrogance or infatuation.Giving up all sorts of morbid feelings serve them in thought, word and deed. You will be happy in everyway in the forest since you will have with you your father and mother in Rama and Sita. Take care, my son, that Rama may be put to no trouble in the woods: that is my admonition to you.” (1 — 4) 
 “My admonition to you, dear child, is this: it is up to you to see that Rama and Sita 
lead a happy life in the forest through your good offices and forget their father and 
mother, near and dear ones as well as the amenities of city life.” Having thus 
admonished the Lord of Tulasidasa (Laksmana) Sumitra granted him leave (to accompany 
Sri Rama) and then invoked her blessing on him: “May your devotion to the feet of Sita 
and the Hero of Raghu’s race be constant and untainted and ever new.” 
Bowing his head at his mother’s feet Laksmana left at once with a timid heart 
apprehending any further development that might bulk his plans and interfere with his 
accompanying (Sri Rama to the forest); it looked as if a deer had luckily succeeded in 
bursting a strong snare and made good his escape. (75) 


AYODHYA-KANDA 


437 

Laksmana went straight to where the Lord of Janaki (Janaka’s Daughter) was; he 
was glad at heart to find himself in the company of his beloved Brother. Bowing to the 
charming feet of Sri Rama and Sita he accompanied Them to the king’s palace. The men 
and women of the city said to one another, “How strange that God wellnigh fulfilled our 
hopes and then shattered them!” With emaciated bodies, a sorrowful heart and doleful 
face they felt miserable as a bee that has been robbed of its honey. They wrung their 
hands, beat their heads and lamented like birds that had been dipt of their wings and 
were restless without them. A huge crowd had collected at the entrance of the royal 
palace and there was untold grief which knew no bounds. The minister (Sumantra) raised 
the king and seated him communicating to him the agreeable news that Sri Rama had 
come. When he saw his two sons with Sita, his distress was profound. (1 — 4) 
The king felt much agitated as he gazed on his two sons with Sita. Overwhelmed 
with emotion he pressed them to his bosom again and again. (76) 


438 

Chapter 72
The king was too restless to speak; there was terrible agony in his heart due to 
excess of grief. Most affectionately bowing His head at His father’s feet, the Hero of 
Raghu’s race then arose and asked his permission to proceed to the woods: “Father, 
give me your blessings and commands; why should you be sorrowing at this hour of 
jubilation? By swerving from the path of duty due to attachment for a beloved object, dear 
father, one’s reputation is lost and obloquy incurred.” Hearing this the king got up in his 
love and holding Sri Rama (the Lord of Raghus) by the arm he made Him sit down and 
said, “Listen, my boy: of You the sages declare that Rama is the Lord of the entire 
creation, both animate and inanimate. God requites our actions according as they are 
good or bad, weighing them in the scale of His judgment. He alone who does an act 
reaps its consequences: such is the law of the Vedas and so declare all.” (1 — 4) 
 “But in this case we find that one commits the offence and another reaps the fruit. Highly mysterious are the ways of know them.” 


God: no one in this world is competent to 

(77) 



AYODHYA-KANDA 


439 
The king sincerely tried every means to detain Sri Rama. But he discovered Sri 
Rama’s intention and came to know that He was not going to stay, a champion of 
righteousness, strong-minded and foresighted as He was. The king thereupon clasped 
Sita to his bosom and most lovingly admonished Her in many ways. He described the 
terrible hardships of forest life and explained to Her the comforts She would enjoy if She 
chose to stay with Her husband’s parents or Her own father. Sita’s mind, however, was 
attached to Sri Rama’s feet; hence neither home seemed attractive to Her nor the forest 
repulsive. Everyone else too expostulated with Sita dwelling on the many miseries of the 
forest. The minister’s (Sumantra’s) wife as well as the preceptor’s (Vasistha’s) and other 
prudent ladies fondly urged Her in gentle tones: “Nobody has exiled you to the forest: 
therefore, do as your husband’s parents and preceptor bid you.” (1 — 4) 

This advice, soothing, friendly, agreeable and tender as it was, did not sound 
pleasing to Sita’s ears. It seemed as if the touch of the rays of the autumnal moon had 
made a female Cakravaka bird restless. (78) 
Sita was too modest to give any reply. But Kaikeyi flared up on hearing their talk. 
She brought hermits robes, ornaments and vessels and, placing them before Sri Rama, 
addressed Him in soft accents, “You are dear as life to the king, O Hero of Raghu’s line; 
he is too soft to shake off his scruple and attachment for you. He would sooner forfeit 




440 

his virtue, good reputation and his happiness in the other world than ask you to proceed 
to the woods. Bearing this in mind do as you please.” Sri Rama rejoiced to hear His 
stepmother’s admonition; but her words pierced the king like shafts. “Will my wretched 
life never depart,” he said to himself. The people felt much distressed while the king 
fainted; no one knew what to do. Sri Rama presently dressed Himself as a hermit and 
bowing His head to His parents departed. (1 — 4) 
Having completed all the equipment and preparations for a journey to the woods 
the Lord with His Spouse and brother bowed to the feet of the Brahmanas and the 
preceptor (Vasistha) and departed, leaving everyone in bewilderment. (79) 
Issuing out of the palace the party halted at Vasistha’s door and found the people 
scorched with the fire of impending separation. The Hero of Raghu’s race comforted all 
with soothing words and then summoned hosts of Brahmanas. He requested His preceptor 
to give them subsistence for a year and captivated their hearts through courtesy, gift and 
humility. He gratified mendicants with gifts and attentions and sated His friends with pure 
love. He then called His men-servants and maid-servants and entrusting them to the 
care of His Guru spoke to him with joined palms, “My lord, pray look after them and tend 
them as their own father and mother.” Again and again, with joined palms, Sri Rama 
addressed each one present there in soft accents, “He alone is friendly to me in every 
way, through whose good offices the king derives solace.” (1 — 4) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


441 
 “Take care all of you, my most clever citizens, to see that none of my mothers is 
smitten with the pangs of separation from me.” (80) 
In this way Sri Rama consoled all and cheerfully bowed His head at the lotus feet 
of His preceptor. Invoking Lord Ganapati, Goddess Gauri (Parvati) and the Lord of 
Kailasa and receiving the blessings of His Guru, the Lord of Raghus proceeded further. 
There was great lamentation as He sallied forth; the piteous wail of the citizens was 
revolting to the ears. Evil omens appeared in Lanka and Ayodhya was plunged in grief, 
while the abode of gods was overcome with a mixed feeling of joy and sorrow. When the 
spell of unconsciousness broke, the king woke and calling Sumantra thus began, “Rama 
has left for the woods, but my life refuses to depart. I wonder what joy it seeks after by 
clinging to this body! What agony more severe than this can I have, that will draw my 
breath out of my body?” Then, recovering himself, the king said, “Follow him, my friend, 
with your chariot.” (1 — 4) 

“Too tender-bodied are the two princes and delicate of frame is Janaka’s 




442 

daughter. Pick them up on the chariot, show them round the forest and return after three 
or four days.” (81) 
 “If the two strong-minded brothers refuse to return — for the Lord of Raghus is true 
to his word and firm of resolve — then do you entreat him with joined palms: ‘My lord, 
kindly send back the daughter of Mithila’s king.’ When Sita gets frightere at the sight of 
the jungle, avail yourself of that opportunity and tell her my advice in the following words. 
“The parents of your husband have sent this message to you: Please return home, my 
daughter; there is much hardship in the forest. Now with your parents and now in your 
husband’s home — stay wherever you please. In this way try all possible means; if she 
comes back, there will be a support to my life. Otherwise all this will end in my death; 
nothing can avail against an adverse fate.” So saying the king dropped unconscious on 
the ground exclaiming: “Bring Rama, Laksmana and Sita and show them to me!” (1 — 4) 
Receiving the king’s command Sumantra bowed his head to him and having got 
ready a most swift chariot went to the outskirts of the city, where Sita and the two 
princely brothers were. (82) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 

443 
Then Sumantra delivered to them the king’s message and with humble submission 
persuaded Sri Rama to ascend the chariot. Having mounted the chariot Sita and the 
two brothers set out on their journey mentally bowing their head to Ayodhya. Finding 
Ayodhya masterless with the departure of Sri Rama all those who had assembled there 
followed in their wake with an agitated mind. Sri Rama remonstrated in many ways, an 
ocean of compassion that He was; and the crowd turned homewards. But dragged by 
the affection they bore for Him they came back and joined the party once more. 
Ayodhya presented a most dismal appearance as though it were the dark night of final 
dissolution of the universe. The men and women of the city looked like ghastly 
creatures and were frightened to see one another. Their houses appeared like so many 
crematories, their retainers like ghosts, and their sons, relations and friends like 
messengers of death. Trees and creepers in the gardens withered, while streams and 
ponds repelled the eyes. (1 — 4) 
The numberless horses and elephants, animals kept for pleasure, urban cattle, 
Cataka birds, peacocks, cuckoos, Cakravakas, parrots and Mainas, cranes, swans and 
Cakoras — (83) 


444 

— All stood restless due to their separation from Sri Rama; they looked like so many 
pictures drawn here and there. The city resembled an extensive and thick forest full of 
fruits and the many men and women residing therein represented so many birds and 
beasts. God assigned Kaikeyi the role of a Bhila woman who set the whole forest in a 
fierce blaze. The people could not bear the fire of separation from the Chief of Raghus 
and they all ran away in distress. They all came to this conclusion in their mind: “There 
can be no happiness without Rama, Laksmana and Sita. The whole community will live 
where Rama takes up his abode; without the Hero of Raghu’s race we have no business 
in Ayodhya.” Having thus firmly resolved they followed Him forsaking their happy homes, 
which were the envy of gods. Can the pleasures of sense overpower those who hold the 
lotus feet of Sri Rama dear to their heart? (1 — 4) 
Leaving the children and aged people in their homes all the citizens accompanied 
Sri Rama. And the Lord of Raghus made His first day’s halt on the bank of the 
Tamasa. (84) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


445 

When the Lord of Raghus saw His people overwhelmed with love, His tender 
heart was much afflicted. Lord Sri Rama, who is all compassion, is readily touched by 
others, pain. Addressing them in affectionate, soft and agreeable tones, He comforted all 
in ways more than one. He also gave them varied instructions in their moral duty; but 
overmastered by love they would not turn back even though urged to return. Sri Rama 
could not afford to take leave of His amiable disposition and loving nature; the Lord of 
Raghus thus found Himself in a fix. Overpowered by grief and toil the people fell asleep 
and the deluding potency of gods further helped to benumb their mind. When two watches 
of the night had passed, Sri Rama addressed the minister in endearing terms, “Father, 
drive the chariot in such a way as to leave no tree; by no other means can our object 
be accomplished.” (1 — 4) 
Bowing their head to the feet of Lord Sambhu (Siva) Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita 
mounted the car; and the minister (Sumantra) immediately drove the chariot now in one 
direction and now in another, thus confusing the tracks. (85) 


All the people woke up at daybreak. “The Lord of Raghus has gone!” they loudly 
exclaimed. Nowhere could they find the tracks of the chariot and ran about in all 
directions crying “Rama, O Rama!” It seemed as if a bark had foundered in the ocean, 
as a result of which the party of merchants that had boarded it felt much agitated. 

446 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Everyone explained to the other how Rama had forsaken them perceiving their distress. 
They condemned themselves and praised the fish (that died as soon as they were taken 
out of water), and said to one another; “A curse on our life without the Hero of Raghu’s 
race! If God has torn us from our beloved, why did He not vouchsafe death to us on our 
asking?” Thus wailing in a variety of ways they all returned to Ayodhya full of remorse. 
The anguish of parting was terrible beyond words. Everyone survived in the hope of 
seeing Rama on the expiry of the term of exile. (1 — 4) 
Men and women alike started religious observances and fasts for ensuring Sri 
Rama’s return. They were as miserable as the male and female Cakravaka birds and the 
lotus flower are in the absence of the sun. (86) 
Accompanied by Sita and the minister the two brothers arrived at Srhgaverapura. 
Beholding the celestial stream, Gariga, Sri Rama alighted from His car and fell prostrate 
on the ground with great joy. Laksmana, Sita and the minister too made obeisance and 
Sri Rama rejoiced in common with them all. A fount of all joys and blessings, the Gariga 
brings all delight and drives away all sorrow. Narrating numerous anecdotes connected 
with it, Sri Rama gazed on the waves of the Gariga and told the minister, His younger 
brother (Laksmana) and His beloved Consort the transcendent glory of the celestial 
stream. They took a plunge in the river and the fatigue of the journey was gone; and their 
hearts rejoiced when they drank of its holy water. That He whose very thought relieves 
the great toil of transmigration should feel fatigued shows that He imitated the ways of 
the world. (1 — 4) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


447 

The Glory of Raghu’s race, who is a fountain of pure existence, knowledge and 
bliss, performed actions similar to those of a human being, and which constitute a bridge 
to cross the ocean of mundane existence. (87) 
When Guha, the Nisada,* got this news, he gladly called together his near and 
dear ones and taking by way of presents fruits and roots in baskets slung across their 
shoulders, he proceeded to meet the Lord with infinite joy in his heart. Prostrating himself 
on the ground and placing the presents before the Lord he gazed on Him with great 
affection. The Lord of Raghus, who is won by natural affection, seated him by His side 
and inquired about his welfare. “The sight of your lotus feet, my lord, is the root of all 
welfare; I can now count myself as a blessed man. My land, house and fortune are yours, 
holy sir; my family and myself are your humble servants. Do me the favour of visiting my 
town and confer dignity on me. Let everyone envy my lot.” “Everything you have said is 
true; my wise friend; but my father has commanded me otherwise.” (1 — 4) 
A low-born tribe in India tracing their descent from a Brahmana through a Sudra woman. 




448 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


“For four years and ten my home shall be in the woods and my mode of life, dress 
and food shall be that of a hermit. Hence my staying in a village would be hardly 
advisable.” Guha was deeply distressed to hear this. (88) 
Beholding the beauty of Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita, men and women of the 
village feelingly said, “What sort of parents, O friend, can they be who have sent such 
children to the forest?” Other people said, “The king has done well in that God has 
thereby rewarded our eyes.” The Chief of the Nisadas then pondered within himself 
and perceived a charming Asoka tree. He took the Lord of Raghus to the spot and 
showed it to Him, when Sri Rama declared that the place was beautiful in every way. The 
people of the town then returned home after paying their respects to Him, while the 
Chief of Raghus retired for performing His evening devotions. In the meantime Guha 
prepared a soft and beautiful bed of Kusa grass and tender leaves and spread it on 
the ground. He also placed besides Him cups of leaves sacred, delicious and soft full 
of fruits, roots and water. (1 — 4) 
Having partaken of the bulbs, roots and fruits alongwith Sita, Sumantra and His 
brother (Laksmana), the Jewel of Raghu’s race lay down to sleep, while His brother 
kneaded His feet. (89) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


449 

When Laksmana perceived that his lord had fallen asleep, he rose and asked the 
minister in soft accents to retire. As for himself he got ready his bow and arrows and 
sitting at some distance in the posture of a hero he kept watch. Guha called his trusted 
watchmen and stationed them at different points with great love; while he himself went 
and took his seat beside Laksmana with a quiver fastened to his waist and an arrow 
fitted to his bow. When the Nisada chief saw his lord lying (on a bed of grass and leaves) 
he felt great sorrow in his heart due to excess of love; the hair on his body bristled, tears 
flowed from his eyes and he addressed the following affectionate words to Laksmana: 
“The king’s palace is naturally charming; even Indra’s residence can hardly stand 
comparison with it. Its beautiful attics are built of precious gems and are so lovely as 
though the god of love has constructed them with his own hands.” (1 — 4) 
 “Free from impurities, exceedingly marvellous of design, abounding in exquisite 
luxuries and scented with the fragrance of flowers, they are furnished with lovely beds 
and lighted with gems and are full of amenities of every description.” (90) 


450 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Again they are equipped with coverlets and sheets, pillows and cushions of various 
kinds — all soft, white and charming as the froth of milk. It is in such attics that Sita and 
Rama used to sleep at night and humbled by their beauty the pride of Rati and her 
consort, the god of love. Those very Sita and Rama are now lying on a pallet, exhausted 
and uncovered, a sight one cannot bear to see. The same Lord Rama whom his father 
and mother, his own family and the people of the city, his good-natured companions, men- 
servants and maid-servants, all cherished as their own life, sleeps on the ground! Nay, 
Sita, whose father Janaka is famed throughout the world, whose father-in-law is King 
Dasaratha, the chief of Raghus and an ally of Indra (the lord of immortals) and whose 
spouse is Ramacandra, is lying on the ground! An adverse fate spares none. Do Sita and 
the Hero of Raghu’s race deserve to be exiled to the woods? They rightly say: ‘Fate is 
supreme.’ (1 — 4) 
“The foolish daughter of Kekaya has wrought a cruel mischief in that she has 
brought trouble on Sita and the Delighter of Raghu’s race at a time of enjoyment.” (91) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


451 


 “The wicked woman has played the axe in felling the tree of the solar race and 
plunged the whole universe in woe.” The Nisada chief was sore distressed to see Rama 
and Sita sleeping on the ground. Laksmana spoke to him sweet and gentle words imbued 
with the nectar of wisdom, dispassion and devotion: “No one is a source of delight or pain 
to another; everyone reaps the fruit of one’s own actions, brother. Union and separation, 
pleasurable and painful experiences, friends, foes and neutrals — snares of delusion are 
these. Even so birth and death, prosperity and adversity, destiny and time and all the 
illusion of the world; lands, houses, wealth, town and family, heaven and hell, and all the 
phenomena of the world; nay, whatever is seen, heard or thought of with the mind has 
its root in ignorance: nothing exists in reality.” (1 — 4) 
 “Suppose in a dream a king becomes a pauper and apauper becomes lord of 
paradise ; on waking, the one does not gain nor does the other lose anything. So must 
you look upon this world.” (92) 
 “Reasoning thus be not angry nor blame anyone in vain. Everyone is slumbering 
in the night of delusion, and while asleep one sees dreams of various kinds. In this 
night of mundane existence it is Yogis (mystics) alone who keep awake — Yogis who 
are in quest of the highest truth and remain aloof from the world. A soul should be 
deemed as having awoke from the night of the world only when he develops and 




452 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


aversion for the enjoyments of the world of sense. It is only when right understanding 
comes that the error of delusion disappears and then alone one develops love for the 
feet of Sri Rama (the Lord of Raghus). O friend, the highest spiritual goal is this: to be 
devoted to the feet of Sri Rama in thought, word and deed. Sri Rama is no other than 
Brahma (God), the supreme Reality, unknown, imperceptible, beginningless, 
incomparable, free from all change and beyond all diversity. The Vedas ever speak of 
Him in negative terms (not this).” (1 — 4) 

“For the sake of His devotees, Earth, the Brahmanas, cows and gods, the 
gracious Lord takes the form of a man and performs actions by hearing of which the 
snares of the world are broken asunder.” (93) 
 “Realizing this, O friend, shed all infatuation and be devoted to the feet of Sita and the 
Hero of Raghu’s race.” While Laksmana was yet recounting Sri Rama’s virtues, the day 
dawned and the Joy and Delighter of the world woke up. After finishing all purificatory acts 
Sri Rama, who was all pure and wise, performed His ablutions and sent for some milk of the 
banyan tree. He as well as His brother then matted the hair on their heads, a sight which 
filled the eyes of Sumantra with tears. With great agony in his heart and a doleful face he 
joined his palms and spoke in most piteous accents, The king of Kosala, my lord, charged 
me thus: Take the chariot and go with Rama; let him see the forest and bathe in the Gariga 
and then speedily bring the two brothers back. Setting at rest all their doubts and scruples 
do bring Laksmana, Rama and Sita back to their home.’ (1 — 4) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


453 

 “The king has commanded me thus; I shall, however, do as my lord bids me, I 
assure you.” Having supplicated in this way Sumantra fell at the Lord’s feet and wept like 
a child. (94) 
 “Have compassion, my darling, and take steps to see that Ayodhya is not left 
without a master.” Sri Rama raised the minister and thus admonished him; “Dear one, 
you have investigated the truths of religion in their entirety. Sibi, Dadhici and King 
Hariscandra suffered untold hardships for the sake of virtue. The wise kings Rantideva* 
and Bali upheld virtue even through many trials. There is no virtue equal to truthfulness: 
so declare the Agamas (Tantras), Vedas and Puranas. That virtue I have found by an 
easy road; by abandoning it I shall be reviled in all the three worlds. To a man who is 

* King Rantideva was a most generous-hearted ruler. He gave away his riches every now and then. 
Having parted with all that he possessed, he and his family had to remain without food and water for full forty- 
eight days on one occasion. He did nothing to earn his livelihood and depended on whatever he got unasked. 
Prolonged starvation had reduced him to a skeleton and he was lying in a semi-conscious state with his wife 
and children, counting his days. On the 49th day he got some rice boiled in milk, another sweet dish and water. 
He was just going to share it with his family when a stranger, who was a Brahmana by caste, appeared before 
him. The king gladly and devoutly gave away what was served before him to the Brahmana, and dividing the 
rest among themselves was about to partake of his own share when another newcomer, who happened to be 
a Sudra, turned up. The king entertained the Sudra as well out of the stock he had in hand. In the meantime 
a low-born man came with his dogs and asked food for himself and his dogs. The king gave away the remaining 
food to these strangers. He had now left with him water barely sufficient to slake the thirst of a single soul. As 
the king was about to quench his thirst thereby a pariah made his appearance and piteously begged for water. 
Moved by his entreaties King Rantideva parted even with his water and went without it himself. 




454 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


highly esteemed, infamy causes agony as terrible as a million deaths, ser, what more shall 
I say to you? By urging something in reply I shall incur sin. (1 — 4) 

Clasping the feet of my father and conveying my repeated obeisances to him pray 
to him with joined palms: ‘Be not troubled in anyway on my account, dear father.’ (95) 
 “You too are extremely kind to me as my own father. Hence I pray with joined 
palms, sire, do everything in your power to see that my father does not feel miserable 
on account of grief for us.” Hearing this conversation between the Lord of Raghus and 
the minister (Sumantra) the Nisada chief and his people felt much distressed. Thereafter 
Laksmana made some poignant remarks; but the Lord stopped him knowing his words 
to be highly objectionable. Feeling shy Sri Rama adjured Sumantra by his own self not 
to convey Laksmana’s words. Sumantra then reproduced the king’s message: “Sita will 
not be able to endure the hardships of the forest; therefore, both Rama (the Chief of 
Raghus) and yourself (Sumantra) should endeavour to see that Sita returns to Ayodhya. 
Otherwise, left entirely without any support, I shall not survive even as a fish without 
water.” (1 — 4) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


455 

Chapter 73
There is very comfort both in her parent’s home as well as with the parents of her 
lord (i.e. , ourselves); therefore, Sita can live at ease wherever she pleases at a particular 
time till this adversity ends. (96) 
 “The piteousness and affection with which the king’s entreaty was attended 
cannot be expressed in words.” On hearing His father’s message the All-merciful 
Lord admonished Sita in countless ways. “If you return, the affliction of your mother- 
in-law and father-in-law, your preceptor and all your near and dear ones will cease.” 
In response to Her lord’s advice King Videha’s Daughter said, “Listen, most loving 
lord of my life, my all-compassionate and supremely wise master: can a shadow 
be torn away from its substance? The sunlight can never exist apart from the sun 
nor can the radiance of the moon leave the moon.” Having submitted Her loving 
entreaty to Her Lord, She spoke these charming words to the minister: “You are just 
like my own father or father-in-law; it is therefore most undesirable that I should urge 
something in reply.” (1 — 4) 
 “It is due to grief that I am constrained to address you*; do not take offence at it, 
sire. In the absence of the lotus feet of my lord all other ties of kinship are of little 
account.” (97) 




456 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “I have witnessed the glory of my father’s fortune; his footstool is kissed by the 
crowns of the greatest monarchs. Bereft of my Lord, my parent’s home, which is such 
an abode of bliss, does not attract my mind even in an unguarded moment. My father- 
in-law is no less a personage than the King of Kosala, the suzerain lord of the entire 
globe, whose glory is manifest in all the fourteen spheres comprising the universe. Even 
Indra (the lord of celestials) goes ahead to receive him and seats him beside himself on 
his own throne. Such is my father-in-law, Ayodhya is my abode, agreeable is my family 
and my mothers-in-law love me as my own mother. But without the dust from the lotus 
feet of my husband (the Lord of Raghus) none affords me pleasure even in a dream. On 
the other hand, impassable roads, forest regions and hills, elephants and lions, lakes and 
streams that cannot be crossed, wild tribes such as Kolas and Bhilas, deer and birds — 
all these are delightful to me in the company of my beloved lord. (1 — 4) 
 “Falling at the feet of my father-in-law and mother-in-law request them on my 
behalf not to grieve the least for me; for I feel naturally happy in the woods.” (98) 



AYODHYA-KANDA 


457 

 “I have by my side the lord of my life as well as his younger brother, the foremost 
of heroes; both carrying a bow and a quiver full of arrows with them. My mind does not 
feel the toil of the journey, and there is no giddiness or sorrow; therefore, pray grieve not 
on my account even unwittingly.” On hearing these soothing words from Sita’s lips, 
Sumantra felt uneasy as a serpent at the loss of its gem. He saw not with his eyes and 
heard not with his ears; and he was too agitated to speak. Sri Rama comforted him in 
many ways; yet his heart would not be pacified. He made many efforts even to 
accompany the Lord; but the Delighter of Raghus gave him suitable replies each time. 
Sri Rama’s command could not be violated either. Cruel was the turn Fate had taken; 
there was no help. Bowing his head at the feet of Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita, he 
turned back as a merchant who had lost his capital. (1 — 4) 
As he drove the chariot the horses turned their eyes towards Sri Rama and 
neighed. Overcome with grief at this sight, the Nisadas (Guha’s men) beat their heads 
and lamented. (99) 



458 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

When even beasts felt so miserable on being torn away from Him how could His 
subjects and His father and mother hope to live without Him? Sri Rama dismissed 
Sumantra against the latter’s will and Himself arrived at the bank of the heavenly stream 
(Gariga) immediately afterwards. He called for a boat, but the ferryman would not bring 
it. The latter said, “I know your secret; about the dust of your lotus-feet everyone says 
it is some drug possessing the quality of turning things into human beings. By its very 
touch a rock was transformed into a charming woman* and wood is not harder than 
stone. If my boat itself gets converted into a hermit’s wife (like Ahalya), I shall be robbed 
of the very means of my subsistence in that my boat will disappear. It is by means of 
this boat that I maintain the whole of my family; I know no other trade. If, therefore, my 
lord, you must cross the river, permit me to lave your lotus-feet. (1 — 4) 

 “I will let you board the boat only when I have bathed your lotus-feet; I seek no 
toll from you. I swear by you, O Rama, as well as by King Dasaratha, that what I tell 
you is all true. Let Laksmana shoot me with his arrows if he will; but until I have washed 
your feet I will not, O gracious lord of Tulasldasa, ferry you across.” 
On hearing these words of the ferryman, mysterious though imbued with love, the 
all-merciful Lord looked at Janaka’s Daughter and Laksmana and smiled. (100) 
* The boatman evidently refers here, in his own rustic yet humorous way, to Ahalya, who had been transformed into a rock by the curse of her husband Gautama and was restored to her human form by the very touch of Sri Rama’s feet (vide Balakanda, Doha 210 and the Charhdas immediately following it). 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


459 

The all-compassionate Lord smilingly said, “Do that which may prevent the loss 
of your boat. Bring water at once and lave my feet; we are getting late, take us 
across.” The same gracious Lord, by uttering whose Name only once men cross 
the boundless ocean of mundane existence, and for whose three strides the universe 
proved too small*, thus importuned an ordinary boatman. Though bewildered by the 
Lord’s words, the celestial river (Gariga) rejoiced on beholding the nails of His toes. 
On receiving Sri Rama’s command the ferryman brought a wood basin full of water. 
In great joy and with a heart overflowing with love he proceeded to bathe the Lord’s 
lotus-feet. Raining flowers on him all the gods envied his lot and said there was 
none so meritorious as he. (1 — 4) 
Having laved the Lord’s feet and drunk of the water in which they had been 
immersed alongwith the other members of his family, he thereby transported the souls 
of his deceased forbears across the ocean of metempsychosis and then gladly took the 
Lord across the Gariga. (101) 

* There is an allusion here to the Lord’s Descent as a Dwarf and to His subsequently assuming 
colossal dimensions and measuring the earth and heavens in a couple of strides. The same Lord who had 
assumed the form of a Dwarf in the Satyayuga now appeared as Sri Rama; hence the two are identified by the 
poet. It is further mentioned in the Puranas that Brahma (the Creator) laved the foot of the Lord when it 
reached Brahmaloka (the highest heaven) after measuring the heavens and it was this water which flowed 
through the heavens and later on reached the earth in the form of the river Gahga. It is also gathered from the 
Puranas that the river, like all other rivers and mountains etc., is presided over by a goddess of the same name 
and it is this deity who is represented here as mystified by the Lord’s behaviour as an ordinary human being 
depending on a boatman for being taken across the stream. When, however, the boatman bathed the feet of 
the Lord with the water of the holy river, the goddess took no time in recognizing the source of her waters and 
rejoiced to discover the Almighty Lord. 




460 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 74
Getting down from the boat Sita and Rama stood on the sands of the Gariga along- 
with Guha and Laksmana. The ferryman too got down and fell prostrate before the Lord, 
who felt uncomfortable at the thought that He had given nothing to the ferryman. Sita, 
however, who could read the mind of Her beloved lord, took off Her jewelled ring with 
a cheerful heart. The gracious Lord said, “Take your toll.” But the ferryman clasped His 
feet in great distress. “What have I not already received, my lord? The fire of my errors, 
sorrows and indigence has been quenched today. I worked for my livelihood for a long 
time; it is only today that God has given me an adequate and handsome return. By your 
grace, my compassionate Lord, I want nothing now. While returning, whatever you 
bestow on me I shall thankfully accept that boon.” (1 — 4) 
The Lord as well as Laksmana and Sita did their utmost; but the ferryman would 
accept nothing. The All-merciful Rama, therefore, dismissed him after bestowing on him 
the boon of unalloyed devotion. (102) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


461 


The Lord of Raghu’s race then bathed in the Gariga and after worshipping a newly- 
made clay image of Siva bowed His head to the Deity. With joined palms Sita addressed 
the celestial river (Gariga), “Mother, pray accomplish my desire, that I may return with 
my husband and His younger brother and worship you.” In response to Slta’s prayer, 
steeped as it was in the nectar of love, the following happy utterance came from the holy 
stream: “Listen, O Vaidehi (Videha’s Daughter), beloved Consort of Sri Rama (the Chief 
of Raghu’s line): who in this world is not aware of Your glory? People become masters 
of the heaven’s quarters the moment You look at them and all supernatural powers wait 
upon You with joined palms. By addressing an humble prayer to me You have done me 
a favour and exalted me. Yet, O venerable lady, bless You I must, just in order to fulfil 
my speech.” (1 — 4) 
 “With Your beloved Lord and His younger brother You shall safely return to 
Ayodhya. Every wish of Your heart shall be accomplished and Your bright glory shall 
spread throughout the world.” (103) 

462 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Sita rejoiced to hear these benedictory words of goddess Gariga and to find 
her favourably disposed. Then the Lord said to Guha, “Go home.” The moment he 
heard this his face turned pale and there was great agony in his heart. With joined 
palms Guha addressed the Lord in pathetic terms: “Hear my prayer, O Jewel of 
Raghu’s race; let me remain with you, my lord, and show you the path; after serving 
you for a few days I shall prepare a beautiful hut of leaves for you in whichever 
forest, O Lord of Raghus, you may go and take up your abode. Thereafter I swear 
by you, O Chief of Raghus, to do as you bid me.” Perceiving his natural love Sri 
Rama took him with Him and Guha felt much joy in his heart. Then Guha summoned 
all his kinsmen and having gratified them sent them away. (1 — 4) 
Then the Lord invoked the gods Ganesa and Siva; and bowing His head to the 
celestial stream (Gariga) the Lord of Raghus proceeded to the woods with His friend 
That day He halted under a tree; Laksmana and His friend (Guha) provided for 
all His comforts. At dawn the Lord of Raghus performed His morning duties and then 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


463 


the Lord proceeded further and visited Prayaga, the king of holy places. This king has 
Truth for his minister, sradha for his beloved consort and a beneficent friend like 
Bindumadhava (the Deity presiding over Prayaga). His store is replete with the four 
prizes of human life, while the sacred region surrounding the confluence of the Gariga 
and the Yamuna marks his most beautiful dominion. The holy Prayaga represents his 
inaccessible, strong and lovely fortress that no enemy has ever dreamt of possessing. 
All the sacred spots are his chosen and valiant warriors, who are staunch in battle and 
capable of crushing the host of sins. The confluence of the Gariga and Yamuna 
constitutes his exquisite throne, while the immortal banyan tree (known by the name of 
Aksayavata) represents his royal umbrella, which captivates the heart even of sages. 
The waves of the Gariga and Yamuna constitute his chowries, whose very sight 
destroys sorrow and want. (1 — 4) 
Virtuous and holy saints wait upon this king and attain all that they desire; while 
the Vedas and Puranas are the rhapsodists who recount his stainless virtues. (105) 
Who can describe the glory of Prayaga, a lion as it were for the herd of elephants 
in the shape of sins? The Chief of Raghu’s race, who is an ocean of bliss, was filled with 
delight to see this glorious king of holy places. With His own gracious lips He told Sita, 
Laksmana and His friend (Guha) the greatness of Prayaga. Making obeisance to this 
holy place He cast a look round the groves and gardens and expatiated on its glory with 
the utmost devotion. In this way he arrived at and saw the confluence of the Gariga and 
Yamuna, the very thought of which bestows all choice blessings. After bathing in the 

464 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
confluence He gladly adored Lord Siva and worshipped the deities presiding over the holy 
Prayaga according to the prescribed ritual. The Lord then called on Bharadvaja; and the 
sage clasped Him to his bosom as He fell prostrate before him. The joy that the sage 
felt within his heart cannot be described in words; it looked as if he had found the bliss 
of oneness with Brahma incarnate. (1 — 4) 
The chief of sages, Bharadvaja, invoked his blessing on the Lord. He felt great joy in his heart to perceive that God had as it were set before him in visible form the reward of all his virtues. (106) 
After enquiring of their welfare the sage allotted seats to the royal guests and offering homage to them sated them all with his love. He then brought and presented to them bulbs, roots, fruits and sprouts, all sweet as ambrosia. Sri Rama, with Sita, Laksmana and His devotee (Guha), partook of those delicious roots and fruits with much relish. Relieved of His toil Sri Rama felt much happy and Bharadvaja addressed Him in gentle tones; “Today my penance, pilgrimage and renunciation have been rewarded; today my prayer, meditation and dispassion have borne fruit; nay, all my pious practices have been rewarded by Your very sight, O Rama. There is no culmination of gain, no culmination of joy other than this. In beholding You all my hopes have been realized. Now be pleased to grant me this one boon, viz., spontaneous attachment to Your lotus-feet. (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 

465 

 “Until a man gets sincerely devoted to You in thought, word and deed, he cannot 
even dream of happiness in spite of all his devices.” (107) 

Sri Rama felt abashed to hear the words of the sage, much as He was sated with 
joy by his love and devotion. The Chief of Raghus then told all in countless ways the fair 
and bright renown of the sage. “Great indeed is he and he the repository of all virtues, 
whom, O chief of sages, you are pleased to honour.” The sage (Bharadvaja) and the 
Hero of Raghu’s line thus exchanged civilities and experienced ineffable joy. On 
receiving this news the people of Prayaga, including religious students, ascetics, 
hermits, accomplished saints and recluses, all flocked to the hermitage of Bharadvaja in 
order to have a look at the charming sons of King Dasaratha. Sri Rama made obeisance 
to them all, who were delighted to obtain the reward of their eyes. Deriving supreme joy 
they gave their blessing and returned extolling the beauty of the royal guests. (1 — 4) 

Sri Rama reposed (in the hermitage) overnight. At day break He bathed at 
Prayaga (in the confluence of the Gariga and Yamuna) and proceeded on His journey 
with Sita, Laksmana and His attendant (Guha), gladly bowing His head to the sage. (108) 

466 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Sri Rama lovingly asked the sage, “Tell me, my lord, by which route we should go.” 
Smiling inwardly the sage replied to Rama, “All paths are easy to You.” The sage then 
called his pupils in order that they may escort Sri Rama; hearing his call some fifty of them 
came, glad of heart. They all cherished boundless love for Sri Rama and each of them 
said he had seen the path. The sage then sent with the royal party four religious students 
who had practised all kinds of virtues in a series of previous births. Making obeisance to 
the sage and receiving his permission the Lord of Raghus proceeded with a cheerful 
heart. As the party passed by some village, men and women of the village ran to have 
a look at them. They felt gratified in having attained the fruit of their life and returned 
disconsolate sending their heart after the strangers. (1 — 4) 

With great courtesy Sri Rama dismissed the students, who returned having 
obtained their heart’s desire. The Lord then crossed the river Yamuna and bathed in its 
water, that was as dark as His own body. (109) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


467 

Hearing of their arrival the people inhabiting the river banks ran to see them 
unmindful of their duties. Beholding the beauty of Laksmana, Rama and Sita they 
congratulated themselves on their good luck. Their hearts were seized with intense 
longing, but they felt shy in enquiring the names and residence of the newcomers. Such 
of them, however, as were advanced in years and intelligent were able to identify Rama 
through same device. They related to them the whole story telling them how Sri Rama 
had proceeded to the woods in obedience to His father’s commands. They were all sad 
to hear this and lamented: “The king and queen have not done well.” In the meantime 
there arrived an ascetic who was an embodiment of spiritual glow, young in years and 
charming in appearance. His ways were unknown to the poet; he was attired in the garb 
of a recluse and was devoted to Rama in thought, word and deed. (1 — 4) 
His eyes were wet with tears and a thrill ran through his body when he came to 
recognize his beloved Deity (Sri Rama). He fell prostrate on the ground and the state of 
his body and mind could not be described in words. (110) 


468 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 75

Thrilling all over with emotion, Sri Rama pressed him to His bosom, he was in such 
an ecstasyas though a pauper had found a philosopher’s stone. Everyone who saw them 
suggested as though love, on the one hand, and the supreme Reality, on the other, 
embraced each other in living form. Next he threw himself at the feet of Laksmana, who 
lifted him with a heart overflowing with love. Again he placed on his head the dust of Sita’s 
feet and the Mother (Sita) gave him Her blessing, knowing him to be Her own child. The 
Nisada chief in his turn fell prostrate before the hermit, who gladly embraced him 
recognizing him to be a friend of Sri Rama. With the cup of his eyes he drank the nectar 
of Sri Rama’s beauty and was delighted as a hungry soul who had secured excellent 
food*. “Tell me, friend, what are those father and mother like, that have exiled to the 
woods children such as these?” Beholding the beauty of Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita, 
men and women alike were ill at ease on account of love. (1 — 4) 

The Hero of Raghu’s race then admonished His friend (Guha) in ways more than 
one. And bowing to Sri Rama’s commands he left for his home. (Ill) 

* This episode of an ascetic has been ignored by some commentators as an interpolation and obviously it is disconnected with the main thread of the narrative and appears to have been inserted afterwards. All the same the lines are found in all old manuscripts. The poet was a saint of uncommon spiritual insight. It is, therefore, difficult to say what was his intention in writing these lines. In any case the episode cannot be dismissed as an interpolation. When the ascetic has been spoken of here as unknown even to the poet, no one can say with any amount of certainty who he was. To our mind he is none else than the monkey-god, Sri Hanuman, or a mental projection of the poet (Tulasidasa) himself. 




AYODHYA-KANDA 
469 
Then, with joined palms, Sita, Rama and Laksmana made renewed obeisance to the Yamuna. Accompanied by STta the two brothers gladly proceeded further, extolling the daughter of the sun-god as they went. Many a traveller met them on the way and beholding the two brothers they fondly exclaimed: “Finding all the marks of royalty on your person, we are sore troubled at heart. When you wend your way on foot, the science of astrology (which tells us that men possessing such and such features should always be borne on some vehicle) is misleading to our mind. The path is difficult and lies through big mountains and forests. On top of it you have a delicate lady with you. Infested with elephants and lions the forest is too terrible to look at. We are ready to accompany you if you enjoin us to do so. We will escort you as far as you go and will then return bowing our heads to you.” (1 — 4) 
In this way they offered their services, overmastered as they were by love; a thrill ran through their body and tears came to their eyes. The all-merciful Lord, however, dismissed them with polite and gentle words. (112) 

The hamlets and villages that lay on the road were the envy of the towns of the 
Nagas and gods. The deities presiding over these towns said to one another: “By what 
blessed soul and at what auspicious hour were these hamlets and villages founded? 
They are so lucky, meritorious and of such exquisite beauty!” Even Amaravati (the city 

470 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
of immortals) stood no comparison with the spots which were trodden by Sri Rama’s feet. 
The dwellers on the wayside were all embodiments of virtue; they evoked the praise of 
the denizens of heaven inasmuch as they feasted their eyes on Sri Rama, who was dark 
as a cloud, as well as on Sita and Laksmana. The lakes and streams in which Sri Rama 
bathed were the envy of the lakes and rivers of gods. The tree under which the Lord sat 
was glorified by the trees of paradise. Nay, kissing the dust of Sri Rama’s lotus- feet Earth 
deemed herself most lucky. (1 — 4) 


Clouds screened Him from the sun, the gods rained flowers and regarded Him with wistful eyes as Sri Rama wended His way beasts. looking at the mountains, forests, birds and 

(113) 
Whenever Sita, Laksmana and the Lord of Raghus happened to pass by some 
village, all those who heard of His coming — young and old, men and women alike — came 
out at once, unmindful of their household duties. Beholding the beauty of Sri Rama, 
Laksmana and Sita they obtained the reward of their eyes and felt gratified. Their eyes 
were wet with tears, a thrill ran through their body and they were all enraptured to behold 
the two brothers. The state of their mind could not be described in words; it seemed as 
if paupers had stumbled on a pile of cintamani. Calling their neighbours they admonished 
one another: “Obtain the reward of your eyes this very moment.” Some were enraptured 
to see Rama and went with Him gazing on Him all the time. Others took His image into 
the heart through the door of their eyes and were utterly overpowered in body, mind and 
speech. (1 — 4) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


471 


Seeing the cool shade of a banyan tree some spread soft grass and leaves 
under it and said, “Pray rest awhile and you may then depart either just now or preferably 
next morning.” (114) 
Others brought a pitcher full of water and said in soft accents, “My lord, rinse your mouth.” Hearing their agreeable words and seeing their extreme love, the tender-hearted and most amiable Sri Rama mentally perceived that Sita was fatigued, and rested awhile in the shade of the banyan tree. Men and women regarded His loveliness with great delight; His peerless beauty captivated their eyes and mind. Standing in a circle with their gaze fixed on the countenance of Sri Ramacandra they all shone like a group of Cakora birds encircling the moon. With His graceful form possessing the hue of a young Tamala tree He fascinated by His looks the mind of a million Cupids. Laksmana too, who had fair limbs bright as lightning and charming from head to foot, appeared most lovely and attracted the mind. With the bark of trees wrapped round their loins and a quiver fastened to their waist the two brothers carried a bow and arrow in their lotus hands. (1 — 4) 

472 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Their matted locks were coiled on their head in the shape of a beautiful crown and 
they had a broad chest, long arms and big eyes; while their lovely faces, which resembled 
the autumnal full moon, glistened with beads of sweat. (115) 
The pair was charming beyond words; their loveliness was unbounded and my 
wits are too poor. Everyone gazed on the beauty of Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita with 
their mind, intellect and reason fully absorbed. Thirsting for love the villagers, both men 
and women, stood motionless even as bucks and does are dazed by light. The village 
women approached Sita; in their extreme love they would put questions to Her but hesitated to do so. Again and again they threw themselves at Her feet and addressed to Her soft and guileless words which came straight from their heart: “Princess, we have a request to make to you, but due to our womanly modesty we are afraid to ask you. Forgive our incivility, madam, and be not offended, knowing that we are after all rustic women. Both these princes are naturally graceful in form; it is from them that emerald and gold have borrowed their green and yellow lustre respectively.” (1 — 4) 

“The one dark and the other fair, but both of tender age, — which is so attractive, — handsome and all-beauteous, they have faces resembling the autumnal moon and eyes like the autumnal lotus.” (116) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 

473 
 “Putting to shame by their comeliness millions of Cupids, tell us, O fair lady, how 
stand they to you?” Hearing their loving and sweet words Sita felt abashed and smiled 
within Herself. Looking at them in the first instance She then cast Her eyes towards the 
earth; the fair-complexioned lady felt a twofold delicacy. With a voice sweet as the notes 
of a cuckoo the fawn-eyed princess bashfully replied in loving and sweet accents: “The 
one who is artless in manners and has a fair and graceful form is called Laksmana and 
is my younger brother-in-law.” Again veiling Her moon-like face with an end of Her sari 
She looked at Her beloved lord and then bending Her eyebrows and casting a sidelong 
glance with Her beautiful eyes that resembled the Khanjana bird (a species of wagtail) 
in their quick movements, She indicated to them by signs that He was Her husband. All 
the village women were as delighted as paupers that had been allowed free access to 
hoards of riches. (1 — 4) 
Falling at Sita’s feet in their great love they invoked upon Her many a blessing and 
said, “May you ever enjoy a happy married life so long as the earth rests on the head 
of the serpent-god (Sesa). (117) 


474 
 “Be as dear to your lord as Parvati to Siva; yet cease not to be kind to us, O good lady. Again and again we pray with joined palms: should you return by this very route, allow us to see you, remembering us as your handmaids.” Sita found them all athirst with love and comforted them with many soothing words even as lilies are refreshed by moonlight. Presently, reading Sri Rama’s mind, Laksmana gently asked the villagers about the road they should take. The moment they heard this the villagers, both men and women, became sad; a thrill ran through their body and tears rushed to their eyes. Their joy disappeared and they felt depressed at heart as though God was snatching back the treasure He had bestowed upon them. Reflecting on the ways of Fate they took courage and fixing upon the easiest road they gave it out to Him. (1 — 4) 
Accompanied by Laksmana and Janaka’s Daughter the Lord of Raghus then proceeded on His way. (As people tried to follow Him) He sent back all with soothing words, though He took their hearts with Him. (118) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


475 

While returning to their homes the villagers, men and women alike, grievously 
lamented and blamed Providence in their heart. In doleful accents they said to one 
another, “The Creator’s doings are all perverse, He is absolutely uncontrollable, heartless 
and remorseless. It is He who made the moon sickly (subject to periodical waning) and 
disfigured it with a dark patch. Again, it is He who made the wish-yielding tree a member 
of the vegetable kingdom and the ocean salt. It is the same Creator who has sent these 
princes into the woods. If He has chosen the forest as a fit abode for them, in vain has 
He provided luxuries and enjoyments. If they traverse the road bare-footed, in vain has 
He created vehicles of various kinds. If they repose on the ground littered with grass and 
leaves, why does God take the trouble of making lovely beds? If God has assigned them 
an abode in the shade of umbrageous trees, in vain has He taken pains to errect milk- 
white palaces.” (1 — 4) 

“If these handsome and most delicate boys are attired in the robes of hermits 
and wear matted locks of hair, in vain has God created ornaments and costumes of 
various kinds.” (119) 

476 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“If they live on bulbs, roots and fruits alone, foods such as ambrosia exist in vain.” 
Some people remarked: “Naturally charming as they are, these princes must have 
appeared on earth of their own accord and were not made by Brahma. In all the fourteen 
spheres ransack if you will the entire range of God’s creation described at length in the 
Vedas as perceptible by the ears, eyes and mind; but where can you find such a man 
and such a woman as these? At their very sight Brahma’s mind got enamoured of them 
and he proceeded to make their match. He toiled much, but none of his products could 
even approach the prototype; and due to that jealousy he has brought these princes to 
the woods and hid them.” Others said, “We do not claim to know much, but account 
ourselves supremely blessed. They too are meritorious in our opinion, who see these 
princes or have seen them or shall see them.” (1 — 4) 


 “Making such fond remarks they filled their eyes with tears and added, Most 
delicate of frame, how shall they be able to traverse such an impassable road?” (120) 
Overmastered by love the women felt as uneasy as the female Cakravaka bird 
does at evening time. Reflecting on the tender lotus-like feet of the princes and the rough 
road they were required to tread, the women said in polite phrase with their heart stirred 
with deep feeling, “At the touch of their soft and rosy soles the earth shrinks even as our 
hearts. If the Lord of the universe chose to exile them into the woods, why did He not 
at the same time strew their path with flowers? If we can secure from Heaven the boon 
of our asking, let us keep these princes, O friend, within the lids of our eyes.” Those men 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
477 
and women, who did not come in time, were unable to behold Sita and Rama. Hearing 
of their exquisite beauty they anxiously asked: “How far, brother, must have they gone 
by now?” The stronger of them ran on and saw the princes, and returned triumphant, 
attaining the end of their existence. (1 — 4) 
Women, children and the aged, however, wrung their hands and lamented. In this 
way the people were smitten with love wherever Sri Rama went. (121) 


In every village there was similar rejoicing at the sight of Sri Rama, who was a moon to the lily-like solar race. Those who could get some information as to the circumstances that had led to Sri Rama’s banishment, blamed the king and queen. Others said, “The king is too benevolent in that he has vouchsafed to us the reward of our eyes.” Men and women talked among themselves in straight, loving and agreeable phrases. “Blessed are the parents who gave birth to these princes; and happy the town from which they hail. Happy is the land, hill, forest, village and every spot which they visit. Nay, the Creator must have felt happy in creating him who looks upon these princes as his near and dear ones.” The delightful story as to how Sri Rama and Laksmana travelled in the woods was broadcast all along the route and throughout the forest. (1 — 4) 


478 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Thus bringing joy to the people on the roadside, Sri Rama, who was a veritable 
sun to the lotus-like solar race, proceeded with Sita and Sumitra’s son (Laksmana) 
looking at the forest. (122) 
Sri Rama walked in front while Laksmana followed in the rear, both conspicuous 
in the robes of ascetics. Between the two Sita shone like Maya (the Divine Energy) that 
stands between Brahma (God), on the one hand, and the individual soul on the other. To 
illustrate Her beauty as it exists in my mind in another way, She looked like Rati (the wife 
of the god of love) shining between Madhu (the spirit presiding over the vernal season) 
and the god of love. Beating my brains for another illustration, let me say She shone like 
Rohini* between Budhat and the moon-god. Sita trod on the path with meticulous care 
planting Her feet in the space between Her lord’s footprints. Avoiding the footprints of both 
Sita and Rama, Laksmana traversed the road always keeping them to his right. The ideal 
affection of Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita was past telling; how can one describe it? Even 
birds and beasts were enraptured to behold their beauty; their hearts were stolen by 
Rama, the wayfarer. (1 — 4) 

* The deity presiding over the fourth lunar asterism, who was born as the daughter of Daksa and was 
the favourite consort of the moon-god. 


t The god presiding over the planet Mercury and descended from the loins of the moon-god. 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
479 

Whoever saw the beloved travellers, Sita and the two brothers (Rama and Laksmana), 
joyously reached the end of the toilsome journey of life without any exertion. (123) 
Nay, to this very day, anyone in whose heart the wayfarers Laksmana, Sita and 
Rama, should ever lodge even in a dream shall find the road leading to Sri Rama’s abode 
(the divine region known by the name of Saketa), — the road that scarce any anchorite 
may find. Then perceiving that Sita was tired and seeing a banyan tree and cool water 
hard by, the Hero of Raghu’s line partook of bulbs, roots and fruits and staying there 
overnight and bathing at dawn the Lord of Raghus proceeded further. And beholding 
lovely woods, lakes and hills the Lord reached the hermitage of Valmiki. Sri Rama saw 
the sage’s beautiful dwelling with its charming hills and forest and its sacred waters. The 
lotuses in the ponds and the trees in the woods were in blossom; intoxicated with their 
honey bees sweetly hummed over them. Birds and beasts made a tumultuous noise and 
moved about in joy free from all animosities. (1 — 4) 
The lotus-eyed Rama rejoiced to behold the sacred and lovely hermitage; and 
hearing of the arrival of Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghu’s line) the sage came forth to 
receive Him. (124) 

480 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Sri Rama fell prostrate before the sage and the holy Brahmana blessed Him in 
return. The sight of Sri Rama’s beauty gladdened his eyes and with due honour he took 
the Lord into the hermitage. Finding a guest as dear to him as life itself, the holy sage sent 
for delicious bulbs, roots and fruits. Sita, Laksmana and Rama partook of those fruits and 
the sage then assigned them beautiful quarters. Great was the joy of Valmlki’s heart as he 
beheld with his own eyes Sri Rama, who was bliss personified. Joining His lotus palms the 
Lord of Raghus then spoke to him in words which were delightful to the ears. “You directly 
perceive everything relating to the past, present and future, O lord of sages; the whole 
universe is as if berry in the palm of your hand.” Saying so the Lord related to him the 
whole story as to how the queen (Kaikeyi) had exiled Him into the woods. (1 — 4) 
 “Compliance with my father’s commands, gratification of my stepmother (Kaikeyi), 
the installation of a brother like Bharata to the throne and my seeing you — all this, my 
lord, is the result of my meritorious acts.” (125) 



AYODHYA-KANDA 


481 


 “In beholding your feet, O king of sages, all my good deeds have been rewarded. 
Now I intend to go wherever you command me to go and where no anchorite may 
feel disturbed. For such monarchs as prove a source of annoyance to hermits and 
ascetics are consumed without fire. While the satisfaction of Brahmanas is the root 
of happiness, their wrath consumes millions of generations. Bearing this in mind pray 
tell me a place to which I may proceed with Sita and Laksmana (Sumitra’s son), and 
building a charming hut of leaves and grass may spend some time there, O good sir.” 
Hearing these guileless and unsophisticated words of Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghu’s 
line) the enlightened sage exclaimed, “Quite so, right You are. Why should You not 
speak thus, O Glory of Raghu’s line, ever busy as You are in maintaining the laws 
laid down by the Vedas?” (1 — 4) 
“While You are the custodian of the Vedic laws and the Lord of the universe, Sita 
(Janaka’s Daughter) is Your Maya (Divine Energy) who creates, preserves and dissolves 
the universe on receiving the tacit approval of Your gracious Self. As for Laksmana he 
is no other than the thousand-headed Sesa (the lord of serpents), the supporter of the 
globe and the lord of the entire creation, both animate and inanimate. Having assumed 
the form of a king for the sake of the gods You are out to crush the host of wicked 
demons.” 
 “Your Being, O Rama, is beyond the range of speech and beyond conception, unknown, unutterable and infinite; the Vedas ever speak of It as ‘not that’, ‘not that’.” (126) 




482 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

“This world is a spectacle and You are its spectator; nay, You make even Brahma 
(the Creator), Visnu (the Preserver) and Sambhu (the Destroyer) dance to Your tune. 
Even these latter know not Your secret; who else can know You? In fact, he alone can 
know You, to whom You make Yourself known; and the moment he knows You he 
becomes one with You. It is by Your grace, O Delighter of Raghus, that Your votaries 
come to know You, O Comforter of the heart of devotees. Your body is all consciousness 
and bliss and is devoid of change; it is the competent alone who realize this. It is for the 
sake of saints and gods that You have assumed a human semblance and speak and act 
even as worldly monarchs do. The stupid get puzzled while the wise feel delighted when 
they see or hear of Your doings. All that You say or do is true; for one should play the 
role one has assumed on the stage.” (1 — 4) 
 “You ask me: ‘Where should I take up my residence?’ But I ask You with 
diffidence: tell me first the place where You are not; then alone I can show You a 
suitable place.” (127) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


483 


On hearing the sage’s words, imbued as they were with love, Sri Rama felt 
abashed and smiled within Himself. Valmiki too smiled and spoke to Him again in 
words as sweet as though they were steeped in nectar: “Listen, Rama: I tell You now 
the places where You should abide with Sita and Laksmana. The heart of those 
whose ears are like the ocean, constantly replenished with a number of lovely streams 
in the shape of Your stories but know no surfeit, shall be Your charming abode. Just 
as cataka always longs to see the rain clounds, disdaining all big rivers, oceans and 
lakes and prefers only drops of rain clouds. Similary those whose eyes are always 
laying for your beautiful vision disdain all worldly comforts and always lay for a 
glimpse of your beauty in their hearts there is a comfortable for you to live in along 
with Laksmana and Sita. (1 — 4) 


“Nay, You should dwell in the heart of him whose swan-like tongue picks up pearls 
in the shape of Your virtues in the holy Manasarovara lake of Your fame.” (128) 

484 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“Abide, O Rama, in the mind of those whose nose devoutly inhales everyday the 
fragrance of sacred and lovely offerings (in the shape of flowers, sandal-paste, etc.,) 
made to their Lord (Yourself), who eat only that which has been offered to You and put 
on clothes and ornaments first dedicated to You, whose heads bow down most 
submissively and lovingly at the sight of a god, preceptor or Brahmana, whose hands 
adore Sri Rama’s feet everyday, who cherish in their heart faith in Rama and none else, 
and whose feet take them to holy places sacred to Rama. Again those who are ever 
engaged in muttering the Rama-Mantra ( ), the king of all sacred formulas, and worship You alongwith Your associates; who offer water to the manes and pour oblations into the sacred fire in diverse ways, who feed the Brahmanas and bestow liberal gifts on them and who look upon their preceptor as greater than Yourself and wait upon him with due honour and entire devotion — ” (1 — 4) 
 “And who having done all this ask only one boon as their reward: “Let me have 
devotion to Sri Rama’s feet!” — enthrone Yourself in the temple of their heart, both Sita 
and the Delighter of Raghus (Yourself). (129) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


485 


“Those who have no lust, anger, arrogance, pride or infatuation, are without 
greed, excitement, attraction or aversion and who are free from fraud, hypocrisy and 
deceit — it is in their heart that You should abide, O Chief of Raghus. Again, those 
who are beloved of all and friendly to all, to whom joy and sorrow, applause and 
abuse are alike and who scrupulously utter truthful and polite words, nay, who are 
resigned to You whether awake or asleep and who have no support other than 
Yourself — it is in their mind, O Rama, that You should dwell. Again, those who look 
upon another’s wife as their own mother and to whom another’s wealth is the deadliest 
of all poisons, who rejoice to see others’ prosperity and are particularly grieved to 
see another’s distress, and to whom, O Rama, You are dear as their own life — 
their minds are Your blessed abodes.” (1 — 4) 

“Nay, those to whom, my dear, You are at once master and companion, father and 
mother, preceptor and everything else — it is in the temple of their mind that Sita and You 
two brothers should reside.” (130) 
“Those who overlook others’ faults and pick out their virtues and endure hardships 
for the sake of the Brahmanas and cows, nay, who have established their reputation in 
the world as well-versed in the laws of propriety — their mind is Your excellent abode. 
Again, he who attributes his virtues to You and holds himself responsible for his faults, nay, 
who entirely depends on You and loves Sri Rama’s (Your) devotees — it is in his heart that 
You should stay alongwith Videha’s Daughter (Sita). He who, renouncing his caste and 
kinsmen, wealth, faith and glory, his near and dear ones, his happy home and everything 




486 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


else, cherishes You in his bosom — in his heart You should take up Your residence, O Lord 
of Raghus. Again, he to whom heaven and hell and even freedom from birth and death are 
the same inasmuch as he beholds You armed with a bow and arrow here, there and 
everywhere, and who is Your servant in thought, word and deed — make his heart, O 
Rama, Your permanent abode.” (1 — 4) 

 “Lastly, he who never wants anything and bears natural affinity to You — incessantly 
dwell in his mind; for that is Your own home.” (131) 

The eminent sage (Valmiki) thus showed Him many a dwelling place and his 
loving words gladdened Sri Rama’s soul. “Listen, O Lord of the solar race,” the sage 
continued, “I now tell You a retreat that will be delightful in the existing circumstances. 
Take up Your abode on the Citrakuta hill: there You will have all facilities. Charming is 
the hill and lovely the forest, which is the haunt of elephants, lions and deer as well as 
of birds. It has a holy river glorified in the Puranas, which was brought by the sage Atri’s 
wife by dint of her penance. It is a side stream of the Gariga and is known by the name 
of Mandakini — which is quick to destroy sins even as a witch strangles infants. Many great 
sages like Atri dwell there practising Yoga and muttering sacred formulas and wasting 
their bodies with penance. Wend Your way thither, Rama, and reward the labours of all, 
conferring dignity on this great mountain as well.” (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


487 

The great sage Valmlki then described at length the infinite glory of Citrakuta and 
the two brothers proceeded with Sita and bathed in the sacred stream. (132) 



Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghu’s line) said, “Laksmana, here is a good descent into 
the river; now make arrangements for our stay somewhere.” Laksmana presently 
surveyed the north bank of the Payaswini river and said, “Lo! a rivulet bends round this 
bank like a bow with the river itself for its string, control of the mind and senses and 
charity for its arrows, and all the sins of the Kali age for its many quarries. Armed with 
this bow Mount Citrakuta looks like an immovable huntsman who takes unerring aim and 
makes a frontal attack.” With these words Laksmana showed the spot and Sri Rama 
was delighted to see the site. When the gods learnt that the site had captivated Sri 
Rama’s mind, they proceeded to Citrakuta with Visvakarma, the chief of heavenly 
architects. They all came in the guise of Kolas and Bhilas and put up beautiful dwellings 
of leaves and grass. They made a pair of huts which were lovely beyond words, the one 
a fine little cottage and the other larger in size. (1 — 4) 
Adorning the beautiful cottage with Laksmana and Janaka’s Daughter (Sita) the 
Lord looked as charming as the god of love accompanied by his consort, Rati, and the 
deity presiding over Spring (the king of seasons) all attired as hermits. (133) 


488 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Gods, Nagas, Kinnaras and the guardians of the eight quarters flocked to 
Citrakuta on that occasion. Sri Rama made obeisance to them all and the gods were glad 
to obtain the reward of their eyes. Raining flowers the heavenly host exclaimed, “Lord, 
we feel secure today!” With great supplication they described their terrible woes, and 
returned joyfully to their several abodes. Hermits streamed in as they heard the news 
that Sri Rama (the Delighter of Raghus) had taken up His abode at Citrakuta. The moon 
of the solar race fell prostrate when He saw the holy company coming with a cheerful 
countenance. The hermits pressed Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghu’s line) to their bosom 
and invoked their blessings on Him just in order to see them come true. As they gazed 
on the beauty of Sita, Laksmana (Sumitra’s son) and Rama, they accounted all their 
spiritual practices fully rewarded. (1 — 4) 
After paying them due honours the Lord dismissed the holy throng and they 
practised Yoga (contemplation), Japa (muttering of prayers) and austerities and performed 
sacrifices unmolested in their own retreats. (134) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


489 

When the Kolas and BhTlas got this news, they felt as delighted as though the nine 
heavenly treasures of Kubera had found their way to their own house. With cups of 
leaves full of bulbs, roots and fruits they sallied forth as paupers to gather gold as spoils. 
Such of them as had already seen the two brothers were questioned about them by 
others who proceeded along the same road. Describing and hearing of Sri Rama’s 
beauty they all came and beheld the Lord of Raghus. Placing their offerings before the 
Lord they greeted Him and regarded Him with deep affection. They stood here and there 
as so many painted figures, thrilling all over and with tears streaming from their eyes. Sri 
Rama perceived that they were all overwhelmed with emotion and addressing kind words 
to them treated them all with honour; while they in their turn greeted the Lord again and again and with joined palms spoke to Him in polite terms: — (1 — 4) 
 “Having seen Your feet, O Lord, we all feel secure now. Our good-luck is responsible for Your visit to this place, O Lord of Ayodhya.” (135) 

490 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “Blessed is the land, forest, path and hill where You have planted Your foot, my 
Lord. Fortunate are the birds and beasts of the forest, whose life has been crowned by 
Your sight. And lucky are we all alongwith our family in that we have been able to feast 
our eyes on Your beauty. You have chosen an excellent spot whereon to take up Your 
abode; You will be comfortable here during all the seasons. We will render all sorts of 
services to You keeping away elephants and lions, serpents and tigers. The dreary forest, 
hills, caves and ravines have all been explored by us foot by foot, O Lord. We will take 
You for hunting to the different haunts of game and will show You lakes and springs and 
other reservoirs of water. We and our people are Your servants; therefore, do not hesitate 
to command us, O Lord.” (1 — 4) 
The same gracious Lord whom Vedic texts fail to describe and the mind of hermits 
cannot reach, listened to the words of the Bhilas even as a father listens to the words 
of his children. (136) 
Love alone attracts Sri Rama; let those who are curious take note of it. Sri Rama 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


491 


then gratified all the foresters by addressing to them gentle words sweetened by love. 
Dismissed by Him they bowed their head to Him and departed; and discussing the 
virtues of the Lord they returned to their respective homes. In this way Sita and the two 
brothers lived in the forest, delighting the gods and hermits. Ever since the Lord of 
Raghus came and took up His abode there the forest became a fountain of blessings. 
Trees of various kinds blossomed and bore fruit and lovely creepers that coiled about 
them formed an excellent canopy. They were all naturally beautiful like the trees of 
heaven; it seemed as if the latter had abandoned the celestial groves and migrated to that 
spot. Strings of bees made an exceedingly sweet humming sound and a delightful breeze 
breathed soft, cool and fragrant. (1 — 4) 

The blue jay, cuckoos, parrots, Catakas, Cakravakas, Cakoras and other birds 
delighted the ear and ravished the soul with their varied notes. (137) 
Elephants, lions, monkeys, boars and deer, all sported together, free from enmity. 
Herds of deer were enraptured when they beheld the beauty of Sri Rama roaming about in 
search of prey. All the forests of gods existing in the universe were filled with envy at the 
sight of Sri Rama’s forest. The heavenly river (Gariga), Saraswati, the Sun-born Yamuna, 
Narmada (the daughter of Mount Mekala), the blessed Godavari and the various other 
lakes, seas, streams and rivers, all extolled the Mandakini. The eastern and western hills 
(from and behind which the sun is believed to emerge and disappear every morning and 
evening), Mounts Kailasa (the abode of Lord Siva), Mandara, Meru, all abodes of gods, and 
mountains like the Himalayas, all sang praises of Citrakuta. Glad was the deity presiding 
492 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

over the Vindhya range*, whose delight was more than his heart could contain, to think that 
he had won such great renown without much exertion. (1 — 4) 
 “Blessed and full of merit are all the birds and deer, creepers, trees and the 
various species of herbage of Citrakuta,” so declare the gods day and night. (138) 
Having beheld the Chief of Raghu’s line those who had eyes, attained the end of 
their life and were rid of sorrow; whereas inanimate objects rejoiced at the touch of the 
very dust of His feet and became eligible for attaining the highest state (blessedness). 
The forest and hill where that Ocean of Bliss (Sri Rama) took up His abode were 
naturally lovely; auspicious and the holiest of the holy; how could it be possible to glorify 
them ? The exquisite beauty of the forest where Sita, Laksmana and Sri Rama came and 
settled, taking leave of the ocean of milk and bidding adieu to Ayodhya, could not be 
described even by a hundred thousand Sesas (each with a thousand pairs of tongues). 
How, then, can I describe it at some length any more than a tortoise living in a puddle 
can lift Mount Mandara? Laksmana waited upon Sri Rama in thought, word and deed with 
an amiability and devotion more than one could tell. (1 — 4) 
 

* Citrakuta being a peak of the Vindhya mountains, the glory of the former is naturally shared by the 
latter. It is on this account that joyfulness is attributed to the range itself. 




* AYODHYA-KANDA * 493 
Gazing on the feet of Sita and Rama every moment and conscious of their love 
for him, Laksmana never recalled even in a dream his younger brother (Satrughna), 
father, mother or even his home. (139) 
In Sri Rama’s company Sita lived a happy life, forgetting Her town (Ayodhya), 
family and home. Ever watching the moonlike face of Her beloved lord She was 
extremely glad like the young of a Cakora bird. Finding Her lord’s affection grow from 
day to day She remained happy as a Cakravaka bird during the day. Her mind was 
so enamoured of Sri Rama’s feet that the forest appeared to Her as dear as a thousand 
Ayodhyas. Dear was the hut of leaves in the company of Her most beloved lord, while 
fawns and birds constituted Her beloved family. The holy hermits appeared to Her as 
Her own father-in-law and their spouses as Her mother-in-law; while Her diet consisting 
of bulbs, roots and fruits tasted like ambrosia. Shared with Her spouse even the lovely 
litter of leaves delighted Her as hundreds of Cupid’s own beds. Can the charm of 
sensuous enjoyments ever enchant Her whose very look confers the sovereignty of 
a sphere. (1 — 4) 
Fixing their thoughts on Sri Rama, His devotees spurn the pleasures of sense as 
worth no more than a piece of straw. It is no wonder, then, in the case of Sita, Sri Rama’s 
beloved Consort and the Mother of the universe. (140) 




494 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

The Lord of Raghus would do and say only that which would please Sita and 
Laksmana. He would narrate old legends and stories, to which Laksmana and Sita would 
listen with great delight. Every time Sri Rama thought of Ayodhya His eyes filled with 
tears. The gracious Lord became sad when He recalled His father and mother, His family 
and brothers and particularly the affection, amiability and devotion of Bharata; but He 
recovered Himself when He realized that the time was unpropitious. Perceiving this, Sita 
and Laksmana felt distressed even as the shadow of a man behaves just like him. When 
He saw the condition of His beloved Consort and His brother (Laksmana), the self- 
possessed and compassionate Rama, the Delighter of Raghus and the Soother of His 
devotees heart, began to narrate some sacred legends, hearing which Laksmana and 
Sita felt relieved. (1 — 4) 
Accompanied by Laksmana and Sita Sri Rama shone in His hut of leaves even as Indra who dwells in Amaravati with his spouse, Saci, and his son, Jayanta. (141) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


495 
The Lord looked after Sita and Laksmana in the same way as the eyelids protect 
the eyeballs; while Laksmana in his turn waited upon Sita and Sri Rama (the Hero of 
Raghu’s race) just as a fool (who identifies himself with his body) tends his own body. 
In this way the Lord, who was as friendly to birds and fawns as to gods and ascetics, 
lived happily in the forest. Thus have I told the delightful story of Sri Rama’s journey to 
the woods; now hear how Sumantra reached Ayodhya. When the Nisada chief returned 
after escorting the Lord, he saw the minister (Sumantra) with the chariot. The minister was 
distressed to see the Nisada chief; words fail to describe the agony which he felt at the 
moment. Crying out “Rama, Rama, Sita, Laksmana” he (Sumantra) dropped on the 
ground utterly helpless; while the horses kept looking on to the south and neighed. They 
were as restless as birds shorn of their wings. (1 — 4) 
They would neither eat grass nor drink water; while their eyes kept shedding tears. 
The whole party of Nisadas was distressed to see the horses of Sri Rama (the Chief of 
Raghu’s line). (142) 
496 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Then recovering himself, the Nisada said, “Sumantra, cease sorrowing now. You are a man of wisdom and a knower of the highest truth; therefore, compose yourself realizing that Fate is unpropitious to you.” Narrating various legends in soft accents, he took him by force and seated him in the chariot. But overpowered by grief he could not drive the chariot; the agony of separation from Rama (the Chief of Raghu’s line) was severe in his heart. The horses would not move along the road; they were getting fidgety. It seemed as if wild animals had been caught and put in harness. They would topple down and turn to look behind, torn away from Rama and smarting with deep anguish. If anyone mentioned the name of Rama, Laksmana or Sita, (Janaka’s Daughter), they would start neighing and regard him with love. How could anyone describe the anguish of separation the horses felt; they were as restless as a snake robbed of its gem. (1 — 4) 
The Nisada was overcome with grief as he beheld the minister and his horses. He then called four trusted grooms and sent them with the charioteer (Sumantra). (143) Seeing off the charioteer, Guha returned; the agony of his separation was too deep for words. And the Nisadas drove off to Ayodhya, plunged in sorrow every moment. 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


497 


Agitated and stricken with grief, Sumantra lamented: “Accursed is life without the Hero 
of Raghu’s race. This wretched body will not survive in the long run; but what a pity it 
did not earn fame by perishing at the time of its parting from the Hero of Raghu’s race. 
This life has become a sink of infamy and sin; I wonder what prevents it from departing. 
Alas! this vile soul has missed its chance. Oh, that my heart does not break in twain 
even now!” Wringing his hands and beating his head he rued his lot like a miser who has 
lost his hoard of riches. It seemed as if after assuming the role of, and posing as, an 
eminent hero, a great warrior had taken to flight. (1 — 4) 

The minister gave himself up to grief like a discreet Brahmana of noble descent, 
who though well-versed in the Vedas and esteemed by the virtuous, has been deluded 
into drinking. (144) 
The minister felt in his heart agony as terrible as that of a virtuous and discreet 
lady of high birth who is devoted to her lord in thought, word and deed and who is 
compelled by evil destiny to live apart from her husband. His eyes were full of tears 
and lacking in vision, his ears deaf and his mind was agitated and confused. Nay, his 
lips were getting dry and his tongue had cleaved to the palate; yet his life-breath did 
not depart, the term of exile serving as a door to prevent its departure from his heart. 
He had turned pale and repelled the sight as if he had murdered his own father and 
mother. Great was the despondency which preyed upon his mind as a result of the 
loss he had just suffered; he looked like a sinner mourning while on his way to the 
abode of Death. Words failed him and he lamented within himself: “What shall I see on 




498 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


reaching Ayodhya? Whoever shall find the chariot devoid of Rama will shun my sight.” 

( 1 - 4 ) 

 “When the agitated citizens run to make enquiries of me, I shall answer them all 
with a heavy load on my heart.” (145) 
 “When all the helpless and afflicted mothers question me, good God, what shall I 
say to them? When Laksmana’s mother (Sumitra) puts questions to me, what glad 
tidings shall I convey to her? And when Rama’s mother (Kausalya) comes running like 
a cow that has recently borne a calf and has her thoughts fixed on it,” the only answer 
I can make to her queries will be “Rama, Laksmana and Sita (Videha’s Daughter) have 
left for the woods.” Whosoever question me must be answered; this is the treat I shall 
have on reaching Ayodhya. Again, when the king who is oppressed by grief and whose 
life hangs on Rama, puts questions to me, with what face shall I tell him in reply that 
having safely escorted the princes I have come back? The moment he hears the news 
of Laksmana, Sita and Rama the king will drop his body like a piece of straw. (1 — 4) 


AYODHYA-KANDA 


499 


“The swampy ground of my heart like a swamoy ground did not crack even though 
the moisture in the shape of my most beloved Rama has left. From this I conclude that in this 
very frame God has endowed me with a body* fit for suffering the tortures of hell.” (146) 
While Sumantra was thus lamenting on the way, his chariot presently reached the 
bank of the Tamasa river. He politely dismissed the Nisadas, who fell at his feet and 
returned with a heart stricken with grief. The minister hesitated to enter the city as if he 
had murdered his own preceptor, killed a Brahmana or butchered a cow. He passed the 
day sitting under a tree and found his opportunity only when it was dusk. He entered 
Ayodhya in the dark and slunk into the palace leaving the chariot at the gate. All who 
heard the news flocked to the entrance of the royal palace to see the chariot. When they 
recognized the chariot and found the horses restless with their body wasting away as 
hail in the sun, the citizens, both men and women, were sore distressed as fish when 
the water runs short. (1 — 4) 

The moment they heard of the minister’s arrival the whole gynaeceum was 
restless. To him the palace looked as dreary as though it were an abode of spirits. (147) 
* It is mentioned in the scriptures that sinners who are condemned to hell are endowed with a subtle 
body (known by the name of Yatana-SarTra), which though subjected to tortures in various forms is wonderfully 
tenacious and does not perish till the sinner has served the sentence. 


500 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
In deep agony all the queens questioned him; but no reply came from him, his voice 
failed him. His ears could not hear, nor could his eyes see; he asked whomsoever he 
met: “Tell me, where is the king?” Seeing his confusion, the maid-servants conducted him 
to Kausalya’s apartments. Arriving there Sumantra found the king as pale and lustreless 
as the moon without nectar. Without a seat, couch or ornaments he lay on the ground 
in a most wretched condition. Heaving a sigh he lamented even as Yayati* when he had 
fallen from the abode of gods. With his heart bursting with grief every moment, he looked 
like Sampatif who had dropped from the heavens on account of his wings having been 
singed. That great lover of Rama cried “Rama, Rama” and again “Rama, Laksmana and 
Sita.” (I^f) 
The minister, on seeing the king, exclaimed, “salutary words jaya jlva!” and made 
obeisance to him by falling prostrate on the ground. The moment he heard this the king 
rose in bewilderment and said, “Tell me, Sumantra, where is Rama?” (148) 
* As a reward for the many sacrifices performed by him during his life-time King Yayati ascended to 
heaven. Indra received him most courteously and encouraged him to speak highly of his own meritorious 
acts. In this way he unwittingly exhausted all his merits and was hurled back to the mortal plane, 
t For the story of SampatT see the CaupaTs following Doha 26 et seq in Kiskindha-Kanda. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
501 
The king pressed Sumantra to his bosom as if a drowning man had laid hold of 
some support. Seating him affectionately by his side and with his eyes full of tears the 
king asked him: “Apprize me of Rama’s welfare, O loving friend; where are Rama (the 
Lord of Raghus), Laksmana and Videha’s daughter (Sita)? Have you brought them back 
or have they left for the woods?” At these words tears rushed to the minister’s eyes. 
Overwhelmed with grief the king asked again, “Tell me the news about Sita, Rama and 
Laksmana.” Recalling again and again Sri Rama’s beauty, virtues, amiability and 
temperament the king sorrowed within himself: “Proclaiming my intention to instal him as 
Regent I exiled him to the woods; but the news neither delighted his soul nor grieved it. 
But my life did not depart even though I had to part from such a son! Who can be such 
a great sinner as I? (1 — 4) 

 “Take me, my friend, to the place where Rama, Sita and Laksmana are. If not, I 
sincerely tell you, my life is going to depart very soon.” (149) 

502 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Again and again the king asked the minister; “Communicate to me the news of my 
most beloved sons. Quickly contrive, my friend, some means whereby you may be able 
to bring before my eyes Rama, Laksmana and Sita.” Recovering himself the minister 
gently replied, “Your Majesty is learned and wise. Nay, you are a leader of the brave and 
courageous, my lord, and have always attended assemblies of holy men. Birth and 
death, all painful and pleasurable experiences, loss and gain, union with and separation 
from friends — all these, my lord, take place under the unalterable laws of time and 
destiny like the succession of night and day. Fools rejoice in prosperity and mourn in 
adversity; while the wise account both alike. Therefore, exercising your mature judgment 
take up courage and cease sorrowing, O friend of all. (1 — 4) 
 “Their first halt was made by the side of the Tamasa and the next on the bank of 
the celestial river (Gariga). Having bathed and drunk water, Sita and the two brothers 
remained without food that day. (150) 
 “The Nisada showed great hospitality and the party spent that night in the village 




* AYODHYA-KANDA * 503 

of Sihgaraura (Srhgaverapura). At daybreak they sent for the milk of the banyan tree and 
the two brothers coiled up their matted hair in the shape of a crown. Then Rama’s friend 
(Guha) called for a boat and after helping Sita to board it, Sri Rama followed suit. 
Laksmana placed on it in an orderly way the two bows and quivers and himself boarded 
the boat on receiving the Lord’s command. Seeing my distress the Hero of Raghu’s race 
summoned up courage and addressed me in sweet accents: ‘Sire, convey my obeisances 
to dear father and clasp his lotus feet again and again. Then, falling at his feet submit 
to him thus: ‘Father, be not worried on my account. By your grace and goodwill and as 
a reward of your meritorious acts my journey to and sojourn in the woods will be happy 
and full of blessings. (1 — 4) 
 “By your grace, dear father, I shall have all sorts of comforts on my journey and 
having obeyed your commands shall come back safe to behold your lotus feet once 
more.” Nay, consoling all my mothers fall at their feet again and again and with profuse 
entreaties make every effort — says Tulasidasa — to see that the lord of Ayodhya (my 
father) passes his days happily. 
 “Clasping my preceptor’s lotus feet again and again, give him my message: ‘Pray, 
so exhort the lord of Ayodhya that he may no longer grieve on my account.” (151) 
504 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


 “Humbly approaching all the citizens and all my people, convey to them my 
submission: ‘He alone is my friend in everyway, who ensures the king’s happiness.’ 
Again, when Bharata comes, give him my message: ‘Abandon not the path of rectitude 
on assuming the office of Regent. Cherish your subjects in thought, word and deep 
and serve your mothers treating them all alike. Again, brother, vindicate your 
brotherliness till the last day by serving our parents and kinsmen. And last but not 
the least look after the king in such a way that he may never sorrow on my account.’ 
Here Laksmana interposed some harsh words, but Rama checked him and then 
entreated me adjuring me by himself again and again, ‘Make no mention, dear father, 
of Laksmana’s childishness.” (1 — 4) 
 “Sending her greeting Sita opened her lips to say something but was 
overwhelmed with emotion. Her voice failed, her eyes filled with tears and a thrill ran 
through her body.” (152) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 

505 
“At this moment, in response to a hint from the Chief of Raghus (Sri Rama), the 
boatman propelled the boat towards the opposite bank. So departed the Crown of 
Raghu’s race, while I stood looking on with a heavy load on my heart. How am I to 
describe my own anguish in that I came back alive bearing Rama’s message?” At this 
stage Sumantra’s speech failed him, overpowered as he was by grief and remorse due 
to separation from Sri Rama. No sooner had he heard the charioteer’s speech than the 
king dropped to the ground, his heart burning with deep anguish. His mind being 
unhinged by excessive infatuation he tossed about like a fish that had been inebriated 
by sucking the foam of early rain water (which is intoxicating to the fish). All the queens 
wailed and wept; how can their great misfortune be described? At the sound of their wails 
sorrow itself was sorrowful and endurance could no longer endure. (1 — 4) 
Ayodhya was in great tumult at the sound of the outcry in the royal gynaeceum: 
it seemed as if a cruel thunderbolt had fallen at night on a large habitat of birds. (153) 
The life-breath of the king had now stuck to his throat; he felt uneasy like a serpent 
robbed of its gem. All his senses were blighted as a cluster of lotuses in a lake that had 
been left without water. When Kausalya saw the king withered and blasted, she 
concluded in her mind that the sun of the solar race was about to set. Summoning up 
courage, therefore, Sri Rama’s mother spoke words appropriate to the occasion: “Ponder 
in your heart, my lord, and reflect that separation from Rama is a vast ocean, you are 
the helmsman and Ayodhya the bark which has been boarded by our near and dear ones 
as its passengers. We can hope to reach a shore only if you have patience. If not, the 

506 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

whole family will be drowned. If you take to heart this entreaty of mine, my beloved lord, 
we are sure to see Rama, Laksmana and Sita again.” (1 — 4) 
Hearing these soft words of his beloved queen, the king opened his eyes and 
looked up like a writhing wretched fish that had been sprinkled with cold water. (154) 
Recovering himself the king got up and sat down. “Tell me, Sumantra, where is my 
gracious Rama? Where is Laksmana and where my loving Rama? Where is my beloved 
daughter-in-law, Vaidehi?” The restless monarch wailed in many ways; the night seemed 
to him like an age and he felt as though it would never end. He was reminded of the blind 
hermit’s curse and he narrated the whole story to Kausalya. He was filled with agony as he 
related the circumstances*. “Fie on the hope of surviving without Rama. What shall I gain 

* The story has been told at length in the Ramayana of ValmTki (Ayodhya-Kanda, Cantos 63-64). One 
day, when Dasaratha was still young, he was out hunting and rode to the bank of the Sarayu in search of game. The sun had set and the king heard at a distance what he believed to be the trumpeting of a wild elephant. The king, who was expert at hitting an invisible mark by its sound, discharged an arrow and lo! It struck a young hermit, Sravana by name, who had been filling a pitcher for the use of his blind and aged parents. The king discovered to his great chagrin that what he had mistaken for the trumpeting of an elephant had been the gurgling sound caused by the filling of the pitcher. The hermit did not mind his own death; but he was worried about his helpless parents, who wholly depended on him. He therefore, implored the king to carry the water to the hermitage and inform his parents of what had happened to their son. With these dying words the hermit breathed his last and the king did as he was bid by the young anchorite. Sravana’s parents,when they heard of his sad fate, begged the king to conduct them to the place where their son was and in their excessive agony pronounced a curse on the king that he too would die of grief for the loss of a son. It is of this incident that the king is reminded at the hour of his death. 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
507 
by preserving this body, which has failed to keep my vow of love? O delighter of Raghus, 
who are dear to me as life, already I have lived too long without you. Ah, Janaka’s daughter 
and Laksmana, Ah, Chief of Raghu’s line, who gladdened the loving heart of your father as 
a rain-cloud delights the Cataka bird.” (1 — 4) 
Crying “Rama, Rama” and again “Rama” and yet again “Rama, Rama, Rama”, the 
king cast off his body in his agony of separation from the Chief of Raghu’s line and 
ascended to the abode of gods. (155) 
It was King Dasaratha who reaped the reward both of his life and death. His 
untarnished fame spread through a number of universes; as long as he lived he gazed 
on Sri Rama’s moonlike countenance and brought glory to his death by making the 
separation from Sri Rama his excuse for it. Stricken with grief all the queens wept and 
praised his comeliness of form, amiable manners, bodily might and majesty. They 
lamented in a variety of ways throwing themselves upon the ground again and again. 
Men-servants and maid-servants alike wailed in anguish and there was weeping in every 
house throughout the city. “Today has set the sun of the solar race the perfection of 
righteousness, the repository of beauty and virtues.” Everyone abused Kaikeyi, who had 
robbed the world of its very eyes. In this way they wailed till the close of night, when all 
the great and enlightened hermits arrived. (1 — 4) 
508 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Then the sage Vasistha narrated a number of legends befitting the occasion and 
dispersed the gloom that hung over them all by the light of his wisdom. (156) 

The sage caused a boat to be filled with oil and had the king’s body placed in it 
(to guard against decomposition); he then summoned envoys and spoke to them 
thus, “Run quickly and go to Bharata; but break not the news about the king to anyone 
at any place. Approaching Bharata tell him only this much:” “The preceptor has sent 
for you two brothers.” Hearing the sage’s orders the couriers rushed alongwith a 
speed that would put an excellent steed to shame. Ever since things began to take a 
vicious turn in Ayodhya evil omens occured before Bharata. He saw fearful dreams 
at night and on waking indulged in all sorts of unpleasant speculations. He would 
perform consecration water over Bhagavan Siva in various ways and invoking the 
great Lord in his heart, begged of Him the welfare of his parents, family and half- 
brothers. (1 — 4) 
While Bharata was thus passing an anxious time the courier arrived. And hearing 
the Guru’s commands he proceeded with an invocation to Lord Ganesa. (157) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
509 
Urging the horses to run as fast as the wind he went on his journey crossing 
difficult streams, hills and forests. There was such a great anxiety in his heart that 
nothing would please him. He thought to himself, “Would that I could fly home.” Every 
moment hung heavy like an year. In this way Bharata drew near to the city. Evil omens 
occurred to him as he entered the city. Crows cawed in an ominous way at undesirable 
places. Donkeys and jackals gave a cry that foreboded evil and which pierced Bharata 
to the heart as he listened to it. Lakes and rivers, groves and gardens had lost their 
charm; while the city wore a particularly dismal look. Birds and fawns, horses and 
elephants were too wretched to look at, undone by the fell disease of separation from 
Rama. The people of the city, both men and women, were extremely miserable as though 
all of them had lost everything they had in their possession. (1 — 4) 
The citizens met him but spoke not a word; they made obeisance and quietly 
passed on. Bharata too could not enquire after their welfare, his mind being obsessed 
with fear and grief. (158) 
510 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


The bazars and the streets repelled the sight as though a wild conflagration had 
broken out in the city on all sides. Kaikeyi, who was to the solar race what the moon is 
to the lotuses, was rejoiced to hear of her son’s approach. Preparing lights for waving 
round his head, she sprang up and ran glad at heart, and meeting him at the very door 
conducted him into her apartments. Bharata saw with wonder that while the household 
wore a wretched appearance like a bed of lotuses blasted by frost, Kaikeyi was as 
happy as a Bhila woman who had set a whole forest ablaze. Seeing her son melancholy 
and depressed in spirits, she asked him: “Is all well in my mother’s house?” Bharata 
assured her that everything was well and then enquired after the health and welfare of 
his own family: “Tell me, where is my father and where all mothers, and where is Sita 
and my beloved brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana?” (1 — 4) 

On hearing her son’s affectionate words the sinful woman brought crocodile tears 
to her eyes and spoke words that pierced his ears and soul as so many shafts. (159) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 

511 
“I have accomplished everything for you, my son; and poor Manthara has been of 
great help to me. Only God has marred our plans a little before they could be completed; 
the king has departed to Indra’s paradise.” As soon as he heard this, Bharata was 
overcome with grief as an elephant who is terrified at the roar of a lion. Crying “Father, 
father, Ah my father!” he fell to the ground much agitated. “I could not see you before you 
left, nor did you, my father, entrust me to the care of Sri Rama.” Then, collecting himself 
he got up with some effort and said, “Tell me, mother, the cause of my father’s demise.” 
Hearing the words of her son she replied as one who had cut a vital part and inserted 
poison into it. With a glad heart the cruel and wicked woman recounted from the very 
beginning all that she had done. (1 — 4) 

Hearing of Sri Rama’s exile to the forest Bharata forgot his father’s death; and 
realizing in his heart that he was at the root of it he remained mute and stupefied. (160) 
Observing his son’s distress she comforted him like one who applied salt to a 
burn. “The king, my son, is not fit for lamentation. He not only reaped a rich harvest of 
merit and renown but enjoyed life also. During his life-time he obtained all the rewards 
of human existence and in the end ascended to the abode of Indra (the lord of immortals). 
Pondering thus cease sorrowing and rule the kingdom with all its limbs (such as the 
army, the exchequer, the ministers and so on).” The prince was utterly dismayed to hear 
these words as though a festering sore had been touched by a live coal. Recovering 
himself he heaved a deep sigh and said, “O wicked woman, you have brought complete 
ruin to our family. If you bore such deep malice, why did you not kill me as soon as I 

512 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
was born? Cutting down the tree you have watered a leaf and you have drained the pond 
for keeping the fish alive. (1 — 4) 
 “Claiming my descent from the sun-god, with King Dasaratha for my father and 
Rama and Laksmana for my brothers I have had you, mother, for my mother! One is 
powerless against Providence. (161) 
 “The moment, O malicious woman, you contrived this evil design in your mind, 
how is it your heart did not break into pieces? While asking for the boons did not your 
conscience pinch you, your tongue did faster nor did your mouth become free of maggot? 
How did the king trust you? Surely God must have robbed him of his senses on the eve 
of his death. Even the Creator has not been able to know the working of a woman’s heart, 
the repository of all deceit, sin and vice! Simple, amiable and pious as the king was, how 
could he know the nature of a woman? What living creature is there in the world, to whom 
the Lord of Raghus is not dear as life itself? Yet even that Rama appeared to you as a 
great enemy. Tell me the truth, therefore, to what species do you belong? Whatever you 
may be, you had better bedaub your face with ink and leaving my presence remove to 
some place out of my sight. (1 — 4) 

* AYODHYA-KANDA * 51 3 
 “Nay, God has created me out of a wone kaikey hostile to Rama! Who is there so 
sinful as myself? In vain, therefore, do I taunt you.” (162) 
When Satrughna heard of mother Kaikeyi’s wickedness, he burned all over with 
rage; but there was no help. That very moment came the hunchback (Manthara) clad in 
a variety of rich costumes and adorned with various ornaments. The very sight of that 
woman filled Laksmana’s younger brother with anger as though clarified butter had been 
poured into fire. Springing forward he kicked her with such steady aim at the hump that 
she fell flat on her face and screamed aloud. Her hump was smashed, her head split and 
her teeth broken and her mouth emitted blood. “Ah, my God! what harm have I done? 
Surely this is an ill recompense for my services.” Hearing this and seeing her vile from 
head to foot, Satrughna (the slayer of his foes) seized her by the hair on her head and 
began to drag her till the merciful Bharata rescued her. The two brothers then called on 
mother Kausalya. (1 — 4) 
In sordid attire, pale, agitated and oppressed with woe and with a wasted frame 
she looked like a lovely celestial creeper of gold blasted by frost in the forest. (163) 
514 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

When mother Kausalya saw Bharata, she sprang up and ran to meet him; but she 
felt giddy and dropped unconscious on the ground. Bharata was deeply moved to see 
her plight and threw himself at her feet forgetting the condition of his own body. “Mother, 
show me my father. Where is Sita and the two brothers, Sri Rama and Laksmana? Why 
was Kaikeyi born into this world at all? And if born, why did she not remain barren instead 
of bearing me, a blot on my family, a very sink of infamy and an enemy of near and dear 
ones? Who in the three spheres is so wretched as I, on whose account, mother, you 
have been reduced to such a plight. My father is in heaven and Sri Rama, the Chief of 
Raghu’s line, is in the woods; it is I who like a shooting star am responsible for the whole 
trouble. Woe be to me, who have proved to be for my family a very fire among the 
bamboos and a victim of terrible agony, suffering and censure.” (1 — 4) 
On hearing Bharata’s tender words, Kausalya rose with a renewed effort and lifting 
him clasped him to her bosom; while tears streamed from her eyes. (164) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


515 
Guileless by nature, mother Kausalya pressed him to her bosom with utmost 
affection as though Sri Rama Himself had come back. She then embraced Laksmana’s 
younger brother (Satrughna); her heart was too full with grief and love. Everyone who 
saw her loving disposition said, “Rama’s mother that she is, no wonder she should be 
so loving.” The mother seated Bharata in her lap and wiping away his tears spoke to him 
in soothing words: “I adjure you, my child, to compose yourself even now; knowing this 

to be an unpropitious time sorrow no more. Take not to heart the loss we have sustained 

and feel no remorse for it, remembering that the course of time and fate is unalterable. 
Do not blame anyone, my son; it is Providence that has turned hostile to me in every- 
way. And when He makes me survive even under such trying circumstances, who 
knows what may be His pleasure with regard to me even now?” (1 — 4) 
 “At his father’s behest, dear child, the hero of Raghu’s line discarded his ornaments 
and princely apparel and put on a hermit’s dress (consisting of the bark of trees) without 
either sorrow or exultation.” (165) 
516 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“With a cheerful countenance, and without either joy or anger, he comforted all in 
everyway and proceeded to the forest. Hearing this Sita followed him and would not stay, 
devoted as she was to Rama’s feet. Laksmana also, when he heard this, sprang up and 
accompanied them; he would not be left behind even though the Lord of Raghus tried his 
best to detain him. The Lord of Raghus then bowed his head to all and departed with Sita 
and his younger brother (Laksmana). So Rama, Laksmana and Sita left for the woods, 
whereas I neither accompanied them nor sent my soul after them (leaving my body 
here). All this happened before these eyes and yet this wretched soul did not take leave 
of the body. I am not ashamed of my love; to think that a son like Rama should have 
a mother like me! The king knew well how to live and how to die; whereas my heart is 
a hundred times harder than adamant.” (1 — 4) 

Hearing Kausalya’s words, Bharata and the whole gynaeceum wailed in distress; 
the king’s palace seemed the very abode of sorrow. (166) 
Much agitated, the two brothers, Bharata and Satrughna, loudly lamented and 
Kausalya clasped them to her bosom. She comforted Bharata in many ways and 
tendered words of wisdom to him. Bharata too in his turn consoled all his mothers, 
narrating legends from the Puranas and Vedas. Joining both his palms he addressed 
them in guileless, innocent, simple and charming words: “The sins attaching to the 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
517 
murder of one’s mother, father or son and to the act of setting fire to a cowpen or a village 
of Brahmanas, and those incurred by slaying a woman or child and by administering 
poison to a friend or a monarch, nay, all the major and minor sins of thought, word or 
deed, that have been enumerated by the seers, — let all such sins be mine if, my mother, 
this plot has my concurrence.” (1 — 4) 
 “May Providence award me the fate of those who forsaking the feet of Sri Hari and 
Lord Siva worship frightful ghosts, if, mother, I have complicity in this plot.” (167) 
 “If, mother, all this has my approval, let me share the terrible fate of those who sell 
the Vedas, exploit their piety, are given to backbiting and expose others’ sins, who are 
deceitful, wicked, quarrelsome and irascible, who revile the Vedas and are hostile to the 
world, nay, who are greedy and lecherous and behave as the repacious do, and who 
cast their eyes on others’ wealth and others’ wife. Nay, mother, if I ever knew this secret, 
may Lord 6iva allot me the fate of those wretches who love not the company of the 
virtuous, who have rejected the path leading to God-Realization, who worship not Sri 
Hari even though blessed with a human form, and take no delight in the glory of Sri Hari 
and Lord Siva, who have abandoned the path of the Vedas and follow the contrary way, 
and who are impostors and deceive the world by assuming false appearances.” (1 — 4) 

518 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Hearing Bharata’s truthful, artless and sincere words mother Kausalya said, “You, 
my dear child, have always been beloved Rama in thought, word and deed.” (168) 

 “Rama is dearer to you than your own life, and likewise you are dearer to the Lord 
of Raghus than his own life. The moon may diffuse poison (through her rays) and snow 
emit fire; nay, an aquatic creature may shun water and spiritual enlightenment may fail 
to eradicate error; but in no case will you turn hostile to Rama. Those in this world who 
allege this plot was contrived with your connivance shall never attain happiness or 
salvation even in a dream.” So saying mother Kausalya clasped Bharata to her bosom; 
milk began to flow from her breasts and her eyes filled with tears. In this way they 
squatted away the whole night lamenting in profusion. The sages Vamadeva and 
Vasistha then came and summoned all the ministers and the elite of the city. Vasistha 
admonished Bharata in many ways speaking to him words of wisdom appropriate to the 
occasion. (1 — 4) 

 “Have courage in your heart, dear son, and do what the occasion demands 
today.” Hearing his preceptor’s commands Bharata rose and asked everything to be 
got ready. (169) 


AYODHYA-KANDA 
519 

He had the king’s body washed in accordance with the Vedic rites and caused a 
most splendid funeral bier to be prepared for him. Clasping the feet of his mothers 
Bharata prevented them (from ascending the funeral pile); they all stayed behind in the 
hope of seeing Sri Rama. There arrived many loads of sandal-wood and aloes and 
diverse other excellent aromatic herbs of untold varieties. The pile was raised in an 
artistic way on the bank of the Sarayu river, and looked like a lovely ladder reaching to 
heaven. In this way all the rites of cremation were gone through and then the funeral 
party bathed with due ceremony and offered a handful of water and sesame seeds to the 
departed soul. After ascertaining the views of all the Smrti texts, the Vedas and the 
Puranas Bharata performed the ceremony of Dasagatra.* Whatever orders the great 
sage Vasistha gave on a particular point Bharata carried out all of them in a thousand 
ways. He bestowed all sorts of gifts on attaining purity. f He gave away cows, horses, 
elephants and conveyances of various sorts — (1 — 4) 
— And even so thrones, ornaments and costumes, foodgrains, lands, money and 
houses; and the Brahmanas had all their desires fulfilled on receiving them. (170) 
* The ceremony consists in offering to the departed soul a ball of boiled rice on each of the ten days 
following the cremation of the deceased. 

f The Hindus believe that the agnates and certain other relations of a deceased remain impure for a 
number of days and get purified only after the prescribed period is over. 


520 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Whatever rites Bharata performed for the benefit of his father (in the other world) 
were more than a hundred thousand tongues could recount. Then, after determining an 
auspicious date the great sage (Vasistha) came and summoned all the ministers as well 
as the elite of the city. They all repaired to the council chamber and sat there. The two 
brothers, Bharata and Satrughna, were also sent for. Vasistha seated Bharata by his 
side and spoke to him words full of wisdom and piety. First of all the great sage repeated 
the whole story of KaikeyT’s wily doing and paid his tribute to the vow of piety and 
truthfulness of King Dasaratha, who remained true to his love even at the cost of his life. 
And as the great hermit spoke of Sri Rama’s virtues, amiability and kind disposition tears 
came to his eyes and a thrill ran through his body. Again, when he extolled the affection 
that Laksmana and Sita bore (towards Rama), the enlightened sage was overwhelmed 
with grief and emotion. (1 — 4) 

 “Listen, Bharata: formidable is fate!” the lord of sages sorrowfully exclaimed. “Loss 
and gain, life and death, glory and infamy — all these lie in the hands of Providence.” (171) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
521 
 “Arguing thus, whom should we blame and with whom should we be angry 
without any cause? Ponder in your heart, my son, that King Dasaratha is not worth 
grieving for. Pitiable is the Brahmana who is ignorant of the Vedas, and who has abandoned 
his own duty and is engrossed in the pleasures of sense; pitiable the king who has no 
knowledge of polity and who does not love his people as his own life: pitiable the 
Vaisya (a member of the trading class) who is niggardly though rich, and who is not 
perfect in hospitality nor in devotion to Lord Siva; pitiable the Sudra (a member of the 
labouring or artisan class) who is disrespectful towards the Brahmanas, loquacious 
and proud of his knowledge and loves to be honoured. Pitiable, again, is the woman 
who deceives her husband, is crooked and quarrelsome and follows her own will; 
pitiable the religious student who breaks his vow and obeys not the orders of his 
preceptor.” (1 — 4) 
 “Nay, pitiable is the householder who out of ignorance forsakes the path of duty, 
and pitiable the recluse who is attached to the world and lacks discretion and 
dispassion.” (172) 
 “Pitiable is the anchorite who has given up penance and developed a liking for 
luxuries; pitiable the backbiter who is angry without cause and an enemy of his own 

522 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
parents, preceptor and brothers. Pitiable in everyway is he who harms others, cherishes 
his own body and is exceedingly heartless. And pitiable in every respect is he who is not 
sincerely devoted to Sri Hari. The lord of Kosala is not worth grieving for, his glory being 
manifest through all the fourteen spheres. There never was, nor is, nor shall be hereafter, 
a monarch like your father, Bharata. Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Indra (the lord of celestials) and 
the guardians of the quarters, all sing praises of King Dasaratha. (1 — 4) 
 “Tell me, dear child, who can glorify him who begot such pious sons as Rama, 
Laksmana, Satrughna and yourself?” (173) 

 “The king was blessed in everyway; it is no use mourning for him. Hearing and 
realizing this, sorrow no more, and reverently obey the king’s command. The king has 
bestowed the kingship on you; it behoves you, therefore, to redeem the words of your 
father who abandoned Rama for the sake of his word and quitted his body in his anguish 
of separation from Rama. The king did not love his own life as he did his word; therefore, 
dear son, redeem your father’s word. Reverently obey the king’s command; this will do 
you good in everyway. Parasurama executed the command of his father and killed his 
own mother: the whole world will bear testimony to this fact. Yayati’s son (Puru)* 

* King Yayati had won the hand of DevayanT, daughter of Sukracarya (preceptor of the demon kings). 
DevayanT having one complained to her father of the king’s infidelity, Sukracarya pronounced on him a curse 
as a result of which he became old and infirm before time. Having been propitiated by him through 
supplication and entreaty, however, the sage allowed the king to borrow the youth of another in exchange for his 
own old age should anyone be willing to part with it. The king thereupon sought the help of his sons, but the first 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
523 
exchanged his own youth for the old age of his father and incurred no sin or blame 
because he did so in obedience to his father’s command.” (1 — 4) 
 “Those who cherish their father’s word, minding not whether it is reasonable or 
otherwise, attain happiness and fair renown and dwell in the abode of Indra (the lord of 
immortals).” (174) 
 “Therefore, you needs must redeem the king’s word; cherish your subjects and 
cease to grieve. The king in heaven will derive solace, while you will earn merit and good 
fame and shall incur no blame. It is well known in the Vedas and has the sanction of all 
that the crown goes to him on whom the father bestows it. Therefore, rule the kingdom, 
feel no remorse and accept my advice as salutary. Rama and Videha’s daughter (Sita) 
will be gratified when they hear of it and no wise man will call it wrong. Kausalya and all 
the other mothers too will be happy in the happiness of the people. Nay, he who will know 
the supreme affinity between you and Rama, will have perfect goodwill towards you. 
When Rama returns home you may hand over the kingdom to him and serve him with 
ideal affection.” (1 — 4) 
four of them declined. It was only the fifth and youngest son, Puru, who willingly parted with his own youth and 
accepted the old age of his father. After enjoying life for a few more years Yayati got disgusted with the world and 
retired to the woods, returning the youth of his youngest son and crowning him king in preference to his elder 
brothers, who had all disappointed him. Even though Yayati had made use of his son’s youth in enjoying life with 
his mother, the son incurred no sin because he had agreed to this arrangement only to please his father and 
made a unique sacrifice for his sake. 
524 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

The ministers submitted with joined palms: “You needs must obey the order of 
your preceptor. When the Lord of Raghus comes back, you may do what you think fit 
then.” (175) 

Summoning courage Kausalya said, “Salutary, my son, is your Guru’s command; 
the same should be respected and obeyed by you as conducive to your good. Cease 
to grieve realizing the vicissitudes of life. The Lord of Raghus is in the forest and the king 
is in heaven (the abode of gods); while you, my son, are thus giving way to faint- 
heartedness. You, my child, are the only support of all including your family, subjects, 
ministers and all your mothers. Perceiving the antipathy of God and the relentlessness 
of fate, I adjure you by my life to have courage. Reverently obey your Guru’s command, 
cherish your subjects and relieve the affliction of your family.” Bharata listened to the 
advice of his preceptor and the ministers, appeal endorsing the same, which were as 
soothing to his heart as sandal-paste. He further heard the mother’s soft words imbued 
with the nectar of amiability, affection and guilelessness. (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
525 

Bharata grew restless when he heard mother Kausalya’s speech imbued as it was 
with the nectar of sincerity. His lotus eyes shed tears that watered the fresh shoots of 
desolation in his heart. All those who saw his condition at that time forgot their own 
existence. Everyone, says TulasTdasa; reverently extolled him as the perfection of 
artless love. 
Joining his lotus palms, Bharata, who was foremost among the strong-minded, 
took courage and proceeded to give befitting replies to all in words steeped as it were 
in nectar. (176) 
“My preceptor has given me excellent advice, which has been endorsed by my 
subjects, ministers and all. Mother (Kausalya) too has enjoined on me what she has 
thought fit and which I certainly wish to carry out with reverence. The advice of one’s 
preceptor, parents, master and friend ought to be acted upon with a cheerful heart as 
conducive to one’s good. By pausing to think whether it is right or wrong one fails in 
one’s duty and incurs a load of sin. You are surely giving me sincere advice which, if 

526 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
followed, will do me good. Even though I fully realize this, my heart is not satisfied. Now 
hear my request and give me advice that may suit me. Forgive me my presumption in 
returning an answer to you; for good people reckon not the virtues or faults of the 
distressed. (1 — 4) 
 “My father is in heaven and both Sita and Rama are in the woods, whereas you ask me to rule the kingdom. Do you think this will do me good or you expect some 
unusual gain to yourself from this arrangement?” (177) 

 “My good lies in the service of Sri Rama, although I have been deprived of that 
privilege through my mother’s perversity. I have pondered in my heart and realized that 
my good lies in no other way. Of what account is this kingdom, which is nothing but an 
abode of sorrow, when the feet of Laksmana, Rama and Sita are no longer to be seen? 
A load of jewels is of no use without clothes; an enquiry about Brahma (the Absolute) 
is of little use without dispassion; abundant enjoyments are of no use to a diseased body; 
of little use are Japa (muttering of prayers) and Yoga (exercises of mind-control) without 
devotion to Sri Hari. A handsome body is of no use without life and all I have is naught 
without the Lord of Raghus. Grant me leave to go where Rama is; my good exclusively 
lies in this. And if you urge that you seek your own good by crowning me king, you say 
so only through ignorance caused by affection.” (1 — 4) 


AYODHYA-KANDA 
527 

“It is through infatuation that you expect happiness from the reign of a wretch like 
me, who is KaikeyT’s son, of perverted intellect, hostile to Rama and lost to shame.” (178) 

 “I tell you the truth: you should all listen and believe what I say. A virtuous man 
alone should be crowned as king. The moment you instal me on the throne perforce the 
earth will sink into the lowest depths. Who is such an inveterate sinner as I, on whose 
account Sita and Rama have been exiled into the forest? The king sent Rama into exile 
and himself ascended to heaven the moment the latter left him. My wretched self, which 
is the root of all evil, is sitting quietly and hears all talk unmoved. Even though I find the 
palace without Rama, I have survived and endured the world’s jeers. Devoid of attraction 
for Sri Rama, who is a sacred object of love, my soul is rapacious and hungers for land 
(dominion) and enjoyment. I have no words to depict the cruelty of my heart that has 
attained notoriety by surpassing even adamant.” (1 — 4) 
 “An effect is as a rule harder than its cause and I am not to blame for it. The 
thunderbolt* is more formidable and harder than bone (of which it was made) and iron 
than rock (from which it is quarried).” (179) 

* The story as to how the thunderbolt was made out of the bones of the philanthropic sage DadhTci 
(who gave up his life in the interest of the gods) has been told in the account of this sage, which appears in the footnote below the Caupafs following Doha 29 above. 




528 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“Clinging to this body born of Kaikeyi, my wretched life is exceedingly unfortunate. 
When life has been dear to me even though I have been torn from my beloved brother, 
I shall have much to see and hear yet. Kaikeyi has sent Laksmana, Rama and Sita into 
exile and has done a good turn to her husband by despatching him to the abode of 
immortals; she has taken widowhood and infamy upon herself and bestowed grief and 
affliction on the people; and to me she has allotted happiness, good reputation and a 
thriving kingdom; in this way she has served the interests of all. I cannot expect greater 
good than this at present; over and above that you proclaim your intention to crown me 
king. Since I have been born into this world through Kaikeyi’s womb, this is not at all 
unbecoming of me. God Himself has accomplished everything for me; why, then, should 
you all as well as the people help my cause? (1 — 4) 

 “If a man under the evil influence of planets (who is possessed by some evil spirit) 
and is also affected by delirium and has been further stung by a scorpion is given a cup 
of wine, tell me, what kind of treatment is this?” (180) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
529 
 “God in His wisdom has ordained for me everything in this world that is worthy of 
KaikeyT’s son. He has, however, bestowed on me in vain the honour of being a son of 
king Dasaratha and a younger brother of Sri Rama. All of you urge me to accept the 
throne and the king’s command is good for all. How shall I answer all individually? Let 
everyone gladly say what one pleases. Barring me and my vile mother, tell me, who will 
say the right thing has been done? Excepting myself who is there in the whole animate 
and inanimate creation that does not love Sita and Rama as one’s own life? What is most 
baneful appears to you all as a mighty gain; this is my misfortune and none is to be 
blamed for it. You are in the grip of doubt, amiability and affection; and whatever you all 
say is right.” (1 — 4) 
 “Sri Rama’s mother (Kausalya) is most guileless of heart and loves me in a 
special degree. Finding me in distress she has said all this under impulse of natural 
affection.” (181) 

530 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “My Guru (Vasistha) as all the world knows, is an ocean of wisdom; the universe 
is like a plum in the palm of his hand*. Even he is making preparations for my coronation; 
when Fate is adverse, everyone else turns hostile. With the exception of Sri Rama and 
Sita no one in this world will say the plot did not have my approval. All this I must hear 
and endure with a cheerful heart; for wherever there is water mud must be there 
eventually. I shudder not to think that the world will call me vile; and I have little anxiety 
about the other world either. There is one terrible anguish that plagues my heart; it is that 
Sita and Rama are suffering hardships on my account. Laksmana has fully reaped the 
reward of his existence; discarding everything else, he has fixed his mind on Sri Rama’s 
feet. As for myself I was born for Sri Rama’s banishment; in vain do I lament, wretched 
that I am.” (1 — 4) 

 “Bowing my head to all I lay open my terrible distress before you. Unless I behold 
Sri Rama’s feet the agony of my soul shall not go.” (182) 

* It is an idiomatic way of saying that the secrets of the world are intimately known to him. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
531 
“I find no other remedy. Who else than the Chief of Raghus can know what passes 
in my heart? There is only one resolve in my mind; at daybreak I must proceed to meet 
the Lord. Even though I am a vile offender and am at the root of all troubles, yet when 
the Lord finds me before him in a suppliant mien he will forgive all my faults and shower 
his special grace on me. The Lord of Raghus is an embodiment of amiability, meekness, 
extreme guilelessness of disposition, compassion and love. Sri Rama has never injured 
even an enemy, to say nothing of me, a mere child and his servant too, though hostile 
to him. Therefore, do allow me, all of you, to depart and bless me in an auspicious strain 
knowing it to be for my good, so that on hearing my supplication and recognizing me as 
his servant Sri Rama may return to his capital.” (1 — 4) 
 “Though I am born of a wicked mother and am myself a rogue and ever guilty, I 
am confident of Rama that he will never forsake me knowing me for his own.” (183) 
Bharata’s words pleased all, imbued as they were with the nectar of devotion 
to Sri Rama. The people who had been burning with the deadly poison of separation 
from Sri Rama were roused to their senses on hearing as it were a charm against 
snake poison alongwith its seed-letter.* The mothers, the ministers, the preceptor 
and the people of the city, all were overwhelmed with emotion. They praised Bharata 

* According to the Tantras (a sacred literature dealing with the worship of deities) there are mystic formulas sacred to every deity, which if repeated with genuine faith and in accordance with certain prescribed rules help the realization of that deity. Every such Mantra has also got a BTja Mantra consisting of a single letter with ‘m’ added to it. This seed-letter, if prefixed to the Mantra itself, enhances its potency. 
532 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
again and again and said, “Your body is the very personification of affection for Sri 
Rama. It is no wonder that you should say so, dear Bharata, since you are dear 
to Rama as his own life. The vile man who through his ignorance hates you because 
of your mother’s perversity, the wretch shall abide in hell for a hundred Kalpas (cycles) 
with millions of his past generations. A gem on the head of a serpent is not affected 
by the sins and faults of the serpent; on the other hand, it counteracts poison and 
destroys burns to ashes, sorrow and indigence.” (1 — 4) 
 “Bharata, you have thought out a good plan; by all means let us proceed to the 
woods where Sri Rama is. You have held out a helping hand to us all while we were 
being drowned in an ocean of grief.” (184) 
Everyone felt as great a joy as when the Cataka birds and peacocks hear a clap 
of thunder. When the people came to know Bharata’s welcome resolve to start the very 
next morning, they all began to love him as their own life. After reverencing the sage and 
bowing their head to Bharata they all took leave and proceeded to their respective homes 
praising as they went his amiability and affection and exclaiming, “Blessed is Bharata’s 
life in this world!” They said to one another, “A great object has been accomplished!” 
Everyone began to make preparations for the journey. Whomsoever they left behind 
saying “You should stay behind to guard the house,” felt as if he was smitten on the 
neck. Someone said, “Nobody should be asked to remain behind; who in this world 
would not have the reward of his life?” (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 

533 

 “Perish that property, house, happiness, friend, father, mother or brother, who 
does not gladly help one turn one’s face towards Sri Rama’s feet!” (185) 
In every house they got ready vehicles of various kinds; their soul rejoiced at 
the thought of starting early next morning. On reaching his own apartments Bharata 
thought to himself: “The city, horses, elephants, houses and the treasury — everything 
belongs to the Lord of Raghus. If I leave it unprotected, the result will not be good 
for me; for disloyalty to one’s master is the greatest of all sins. A servant is he who 
serves the interests of his master, no matter if anyone brings millions of imputations 
against him.” Pondering thus he summoned faithful servants who had never dreamt 
of flinching from their duty. Confiding to them all the secrets he taught them their 
paramount duty and entrusted them with the work for which they were severally fit. 
After making all arrangements and posting guards Bharata went to Sri Rama’s mother 
(Kausalya). (1 — 4) 
Knowing all the mothers in distress, Bharata, who understood the ways of love, 
ordered palanquins to be got ready and sedan-chairs to be equipped. (186) 

534 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Much afflicted at heart like the male and female Cakravaka birds, the men and 
women of the city longed for the dawn. They kept awake the whole night till it was 
daybreak, when Bharata summoned his wise counsellors and said to them, “Take all that 
is necessary for the installations ceremony; the sage (Vasistha) will crown Sri Rama 
even in the forest. Start expeditiously.” Hearing this the ministers greeted him and had 
the horses, chariots and elephants immediately equipped. Taking with him his wife, 
Arundhati, and the requisites for Agnihotra* (offering oblations into the sacred fire) the 
chief of sages, Vasistha, was the first to mount the chariot and led the way. Hosts of 
Brahmanas, who were all repositories of austerity and spiritual glow followed in vehicles 
of various kinds. The people of the city followed next; having equipped their own 
conveyances they all left for Citrakuta. All the queens journeyed in palanquins which 
were lovely beyond words. (1 — 4) 
Leaving the city in the charge of faithful servants and respectfully sending the 
whole party ahead, the two brothers, Bharata and Satrughna, started last of all, 
remembering the feet of Sri Rama and Sita. (187) 

* In ancient times, as a general rule, every Brahmana maintained the sacred fire and kept it 
perpetually alive till his death, when he was cremated with the same fire. He carried it with him wherever he 
went and poured oblations into it every morning and evening. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
535 

Seized with a longing for the sight of Sri Rama, all the people, including both men 
and women, headed with the same zeal as male and female elephants rush in pursuit 
of water. Realizing in their heart that Sita and Rama were in the woods Bharata and 
his younger brother journeyed on foot. Seeing their affection the people were overcome 
with emotion and dismounting walked on foot, leaving their horses, elephants and 
chariots. Going up to Bharata Sri Rama’s mother (Kausalya) stopped her palanquin by 
his side and spoke in soft accents, “I adjure you by my life to mount the chariot, dear 
child; or else all our near and dear ones will be put to trouble. If you walk on foot the 
whole party will follow suit and you know they are all wasted with sorrow and hardly 
fit to undertake the journey on foot.” Reverently obeying her command and bowing their 
head at her feet the two brothers mounted their chariot and proceeded on the journey. 
They halted the first day on the bank of the Tamasa* river and made the next halt on 
the bank of the Gomati. (1 — 4) 

Some of them lived on milk and some on fruits; while others took their meals by 
night. Renouncing ornaments and luxuries they observed vows and fasts for the sake 
of Sri Rama. (188) 

* The Tamasa (now popularly known by the name of Tons) is a branch of Ghaghara which leaves that 
river about 10 miles from Ayodhya and after flowing past the town of Azamgarh falls into the Sarayu. 

536 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Halting on the bank of the Sai* river they resumed their journey at daybreak and 
the whole party drew near to Srhgaverapuraf. When the Nisada chief (Guha) heard the 
whole story, he anxiously thought within himself: “What motive can Bharata have in 
journeying to the woods? He must have some evil design at heart. If he had no 
mischievous intention at heart, why should he have brought an army with him? He must 
have thought that after killing Rama and his younger brother (Laksmana) he would reign 
peacefully and happily. But Bharata did not take to heart the maxims of sound polity; 
latterly he brought on himself stigma alone but this time he will meet a sure death. If all 
the warriors among the gods and demons combine against Sri Rama, even they will fail 
to conquer him in battle. But what wonder that Bharata should behave as he is doing; 
for venomous plants, after all, can never bear fruits of ambrosia.” (1 — 4) 
Pondering thus Guha said to his kinsmen, “Be alert all of you; collect the boats 
and sink them and blockade the ghats (flight of steps leading to the river landing- 
place).” (189) 
* The Sal rises about midway between the Gomati and the Ganga and falls into the former 10 miles 
below the city of Jaunpur. 
t The site of the ancient Sriigaverapura is marked by a village bearing the same name under the 
modernized form ‘Singraur’ 22 miles to the north-west of Allahabad. The Ganga has changed its course and only a small branch now flows through the old channel. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


537 
 “Equip yourself and blockade the ghats; be prepared in everyway to face death. I 
will encounter Bharata in open combat and would not let him cross the Gariga so long 
as there is life in me. To die in battle and that too on the bank of the Gariga; and to lay 
down this frail body in Sri Rama’s cause! Then Bharata is Sri Rama’s own brother and 
a king; while I am an humble servant! It is through a great good fortune that one meets 
with a death like this. In the cause of my master I will fight on the battlefield and will 
brighten the fourteen spheres with my glory. I am going to lay down my life for the sake 
of Sri Rama (the Lord of Raghus) and will be a gainer either way. (If I win the battle I 
will have served the cause of my master, and if I die I will attain the eternal abode of 
the Lord and his constant service.) He who is not reckoned among the virtuous and is 
neither counted among Sri Rama’s devotees, lives in vain in this world; he is a veritable 
burden to the earth and an axe to the tree of his mother’s youth.” (1 — 4) 

The Nisada chief, who was not the least troubled at heart, encouraged all and, fixing 
his thought on Sri Rama, forthwith demanded his quiver, bow and coat of mail. (190) 

538 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 75
 “Make haste, brethren, to get ready the necessary equipment; on hearing my 
command, let no one shrink in fear.” “very well, my lord,” they all joyfully responded, and 
roused the spirit of one another. Greeting their chief one after another, the Nisadas left; 
they were all brave and loved to fight on the battlefield. Invoking the shoes of Sri Rama’s 
lotus feet they fastened their quiver and strung their bow. Nay, they donned their coat of 
mail, placed the helmet on their head and straightened their axe, bludgeon and spear. 
Some of them who were exceptionally clever at fencing, sprang with such agility that it 
seemed they never touched the ground and moved in the air. Equipping themselves with 
their weapons etc., and forming themselves into batches they all went up to their chief, 
Guha, and greeted him. Seeing his gallant warriors and finding them all fit for active 
service he addressed them, each by his name, and duly honoured them. (1 — 4) 
 “Don’t be treacherous (spare not your life), brethren; there is a great issue before 
me today.” At this the gallant warriors spiritedly exclaimed, “Have patience, our brave 
 “Through the majesty of Sri Rama and by your might, my lord, we shall leave no 
fighting man or horse in the enemy’s ranks. We shall never retrace our steps so long as 
there is life in us; nay, we shall strew the earth with the trunks and heads of fallen 
warriors!” The Nisada chief saw that he had a good band of warriors and exclaimed, 
“Beat the martial drum.” Even as he said so someone sneezed on the left. The sooth- 
* AYODHYA-KANDA * 539 

sayers said, “The sneeze has come from an auspicious quarter! (The issue will be a happy 
one.)” An old man thought over the meaning of the omen and exclaimed, “Let us go and 
meet Bharata; there will be no conflict. Bharata is out to persuade Sri Rama to return. 
The omen tells us that there will be no discord.” On hearing this Guha said, “The old man 
says aright. Fools act precipitately and repent. If we come to a clash without knowing 
Bharata’s intentions and ascertaining his temper and disposition, we shall be doing much 
harm to our own cause.” (1 — 4) 

 “Close up, all my warriors, and blockade the ghats till I meet Bharata and find out 
what is in his mind. When I have ascertained his friendly, hostile or neutral attitude I shall 
act accordingly after that.” (192) 

“I shall test his love on the touchstone of his friendly disposition; for hatred and 
love cannot be disguised even if one tries to do so.” So saying he began to collect 
articles for making a present and sent for bulbs, roots and fruits as well as birds and 
deer. Men of the porter class also brought loads of fat and ripe fish of the Pathlna* 
species. Thus equipping himself with presents he proceeded to meet Bharata and met 
with auspicious and happy omens. As soon as he saw the chief of sages, Vasistha, he 
mentioned his own name and prostrated himself before the sage from a distance. The 
sage, who knew him to be a friend of Sri Rama, bestowed his blessing on him and told 
Bharata in detail about him. Hearing that he was a friend of Sri Rama, Bharata alighted 

* The Pathlna is said to be a kind of sea-fish, the Silurus Pelorius or Boalis. 

540 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


from his chariot and, leaving it behind, advanced towards him with a heart overflowing 
with love. Guha, on his part mentioned his village, caste and name and greeted him by 
placing his head on the ground. (1 — 4) 

When Bharata saw him falling prostrate on the ground he lifted him and pressed 
him to his bosom. He felt as if he had met Laksmana and the surging emotion of his heart 
could not be repressed. (193) 

Bharata embraced him with great affection and the people admired the mode of his 
love. Raising a jubilant cry of applause the gods extolled him and rained flowers on him. 
“This man is low in the eyes of the world as well as from the point of view of the Vedas, 
so much so that one must bathe even on crossing his shadow. Yet Sri Rama’s younger 
brother, Bharata, has met him in close embrace, his body thrilling all over with joy. Hosts 
of sins turn away from them who utter the name of Rama even while yawning. As for 
this man he was embraced by Sri Rama Himself, who thereby bestowed on him and his 
family the efficacy of sanctifying the whole world. When the water of the Karmanasa joins 
the celestial stream (the Gariga) tell me who would not place it on his head ! The whole 
world knows how Valmiki became as good as Brahma (God Himself) by repeating the 
name (Rama) in the reverse way (as Mara). (1 — 4) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


541 

 “Even a pariah*, a Sabara (Bhila), a Khasi, the stupid barbarian and the vile Kola 
and Kirata get supremely sanctified and get renowned through all the spheres by uttering 
the name of Rama.” (194) 
 “It is no wonder; it has been so for ages. Who has not been exalted through contact 
with the Hero of Raghu’s race?” In this way the gods glorified Sri Rama’s name and the 
people of Ayodhya rejoiced as they heard the praise. Having thus met Sri Rama’s friend 
(Guha), Bharata lovingly enquired after his health, welfare and happiness. Seeing 
Bharata’s amiability and affection on that occasion the Nisada forgot all about himself. His 
bashfulness, love and soul’s delight grew; and he stood gazing at Bharata with unwinking 
eyes. Collecting himself he bowed at Bharata’s feet again and with joined palms lovingly 
submitted, “Now that I have beheld your lotus feet, which are the very fountain of 
happiness, I have accounted myself blessed for all time. And now, my lord, by your 
supreme grace my welfare is assured for millions of generations. (1 — 4) 
 “Remembering my doings and my descent, on the one hand, and realizing the 

* The word used in the original is ‘Svapaca’ (lit., one who cooks the flesh of a dog, i.e., lives on the 
flesh of dogs; the Kolas and Kiratas are wild mountain tribes; the KhasTs are another hilly tribe inhabiting 
Khasa, a hilly tract in Northern India). 
542 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Lord’s greatness on the other, he who does not devote himself to Sri Rama’s feet has 
been befooled in this world by Providence.” (195) 

“False, cowardly, evil-minded and low-born as I am and cast off from society as 
well as from the fold of the Vedas in everyway, I have become the ornament of the world 
ever since Sri Rama took me for his own.” Seeing his affection and hearing his humble 
submission Bharata’s younger brother, Satrughna, embraced him next. The Nisada chief 
then greeted all the dowager queens in polite and respectful terms, mentioning his name 
each time. Treating him on the same footing as Laksmana they gave him their blessing: 
May you live happily for millions of years. The men and women of the city were as glad 
to see the Nisada chief as if they saw Laksmana, and said, “He has surely reaped the 
reward of his existence in that our beloved Rama folded him in his arms.” Hearing them 
extol his good fortune the Nisada chief led them with a cheerful heart. (1 — 4) 

Receiving a signal from him and learning their master’s will all his attendants 
dispersed; and in the houses, the foot of trees, ponds, orchards and groves they made 
room for the guests to take up their lodging. (196) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


543 

Chapter 76

When Bharata beheld the town of Srrigaverapura, all his limbs were overpowered 
with emotion. Leaning on the Nisada chief he presented a goodly sight; it appeared as 
if meekness and love had taken a living form. In this way Bharata with all his army went 
and saw the stream of the Gariga, which purifies the whole world. He made obeisance 
to the ghat where Sri Rama had bathed and said His prayers; and his soul was 
enraptured as if he had met Sri Rama Himself. The men and women of the city bowed 
low; they were glad to see the divine stream. Taking a dip into the river they begged with 
joined palms to be favoured with abundant love for Sri Ramacandra’s feet. Bharata 
exclaimed, “Mother Gariga! your sands are delightful to all and the very cow of plenty to 
your devotees. With joined palms, therefore, I ask of you only one boon; viz., spontaneous 
love for the feet of Sita and Sri Rama.” (1 — 4) 
In this way after taking a dip into the Gariga and receiving his Guru’s commands, 
and on learning that all his mothers had finished their bath he had the tents shifted. (197) 

544 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 77
The people took up their lodgings at different places and Bharata made enquiries 
about all. After worshipping the gods and taking leave of them the two brothers (Bharata 
and Satrughna) went up to Sri Rama’s mother (Kausalya). Bharata showed respect to 
all his mothers by kneading their feet and speaking to each in polite terms. Then 
entrusting his brother with the service of his mothers he himself summoned the Nisada 
chief and went hand in hand with him, his body overpowered with excess of love. He 
asked his friend to show him the spot — and thereby soothe the agony of his eyes and 
soul to some extent — where Sita, Sri Rama and Laksmana had slept at night. Even as 
he spoke the corners of his eyes were filled with tears. The Nisada chief was distressed 
to hear Bharata’s words and presently took him to the spot — (1 — 4) 
— Where the Chief of Raghu’s line had rested under a holy Asoka tree. With great 
affection and reverence Bharata prostrated himself there. (198) 

Beholding a lovely litter of Kusa grass he paced round it clockwise and made 
obeisance. He also placed the dust of Sri Rama’s footprints on his eyes with an excess 
* AYODHYA-KANDA * 545 

of love which could not be described in words. He saw there a few gold spangles, which 
he placed on his head and treated them on a par with Sita. With tears in his eyes and 
a heart full of remorse he spoke to his friend in sweet accents: “These spangles have 
lost their charm and appear lustreless due to their separation from Sita, even as the 
people of Ayodhya, both men and women, are spent through sorrow. To whom shall I 
liken her father, Janaka, who in this world is a master of asceticism and enjoyment both? 
And she had for her father-in-law King Dasaratha, the sun of the solar race, who was 
the envy even of the lord of paradise (Indra). And her beloved lord is no other than Lord 
Sri Rama, from whose glory all great ones derive their greatness! (1 — 4) 

 “Even as I gaze on the litter used by Sita, the jewel among virtuous women 
devoted to their lord, my heart does not break in horror; it is harder than adamant, 
my God.” (199) 
"And my younger brother, Laksmana, is so comely and worth fondling; never was 
there such a brother, nor is there, nor will be. Beloved of the people and the darling of 
his parents, he is dear as life to both Sita and the Hero of Raghu's line. Nay, he is so 
delicate of frame and tender of disposition and his body has never been exposed to hot 
winds; yet he is bearing hardships of every kind in the woods. Oh! my breast has 
outdone millions of thunderbolts. As for Sri Rama he has illumined the world by being 
born in it; he is such an ocean of beauty, amiability, joy and all excellences. Sri Rama's 
disposition is the delight of the people of Ayodhya and his own family, much more of his 
preceptor and parents. Even enemies praise Sri Rama, who steals the heart by his polite 
546 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


speech, agreeable manners and modesty of behaviour. Millions of Saradas (goddesses 
of speech) and hundreds of millions of Sesas (serpent-gods) are unable to reckon up the 
virtues of the Lord." (1 — 4) 

"That jewel of Raghu's line, who is bliss personified and a mine of joy and 
blessings, sleeps on the ground spreading the Kusa grass on it! The ways of Providence 
are inexorable indeed." (200) 

"Sri Rama had never heard any mention of sorrow; the king (our father) tended him 
like the tree of life. Nay, all the mothers cherished him day and night even as the eyelids 
protect the eyes or a serpent guards the gem on its head. The same Rama now wanders 
through the forest on foot living on bulbs, roots, fruits and flowers. Accursed is Kaikeyi 
(my mother), the root of evil, who turned hostile to him (her own husband) who was the 
dearest object of her life. And twice accursed is my own wretched self, the ocean of sin 
and the occasion of all trouble. While God created me as a blot on my family, my wicked 
mother has made me the enemy of my master." Hearing this the Nisada chief lovingly 
comforted him: "Why should you lament in vain? Sri Rama is dear to you, and you are 
dear to Rama: this is a settled fact, and the blame rests with an adverse fate." (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


547 

"Cruel indeed are the doings of an adverse fate, which drove mother Kaikeyi mad. 
The Lord reverently praised you again and again that night. There is no one, says 
TulasTdasa, so supremely dear to Sri Rama as you are: I declare this on oath. Therefore, 
be assured that all will be well in the end and take courage in your heart." 
"Sri Rama knows the heart of all; nay, He is an embodiment of tenderness, 
affection and compassion. Considering this and summoning courage in your heart, 
please go and take rest." (201) 

Bharata took comfort at the words of his friend and proceeded towards his 
lodgings with his thoughts directed towards the Hero of Raghu's race. On receiving this 
548 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
news the men and women of the city sallied forth to see the place (where Sri Rama had 
slept one night) much distressed at heart. Pacing round the spot clockwise they made 
obeisance to it and blamed Kaikeyi to their heart's content. Tears rushed to their eyes 
again and again and they reproached cruel Fate. Some would praise Bharata's love, while 
others said the king had vindicated his affection. They would reproach themselves and 
praise the Nisada chief; who can describe their confusion and woe? In this way they all 
kept vigil overnight and at daybreak the passage across the river began. The Guru was 
put on a good and handsome boat, and all the mothers on another newly-built one. In 
an hour and a half everyone was taken across. When Bharata had alighted, he made sure 
that all had come. (1 — 5) 

Having finished the morning duties Bharata adored his mothers' feet and bowed 
his head to the preceptor, and keeping a party of the Nisadas ahead started the whole host. 

He made the Nisada chief lead the van and then started the palanquins carrying 
the queen-mothers, and summoning his younger brother (Satrughna) told him off as 
their escort. The Guru proceeded next alongwith the other Brahmanas. He himself then 
made obeisance to the celestial river, invoked Sita, Rama and Laksmana and set 
forth on foot; Horse while empty saddle wise led by the bridle alongwith him. Again and 
again his faithful servants said, "Be pleased, sire, to mount your horse." "Sri Rama 
has gone on foot; while chariots, elephants and horses are intended for me! What 
behoves me is that I should walk on my head; most diflicaly for of servan." Seeing his 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
549 
behaviour and hearing his polite speech all his servants melted out of a feeling of self- 
disparagement. (1 — 4) 
Bharata entered the limits of Prayaga (the area surrounding the confluence of the 
Gariga and Yamuna near Allahabad) in the afternoon; overflowing with love he cried 
"Rama, Sita!" "Rama, Sita!" even as he went. (203) 

The blisters on the soles of his feet glistened like dew-drops on a lotus bud. The 
whole company was grieved to hear that Bharata had made the day's march on foot. 
After ascertaining that all had finished their ablutions, he repaired to the confluence of 
the Gariga, Yamuna and Sarasvati and did homage to it. He bathed in white and dark 
waters with due ceremony and honoured the Brahmanas bestowing gifts on them. As 
he watched the coming of the dark and white waves Bharata felt a thrill of joy over his 
body and he joined his palms in prayer: "You are the bestower of all desired objects, 
O king of sacred places; your glory is known to the Vedas and manifest throughout the 
world. Abandoning the course of conduct prescribed for a Ksatriya I beg alms of you 
as what vile act is there that an afflicted soul would not stoop to? Realizing this in their 
heart of hearts the wise and generous donors accomplish in this world the prayer of the 
suppliant. (1 — 4) 



550 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
"I have no liking for wealth nor for religious merit nor for sensuous enjoyment nor 
again do I seek the state of perfect and perpetual calm. Birth after birth let me have 
devotion to Sri Rama's feet: this is the only boon I ask and nought else." (204) 
"Let Sri Rama take me for a wicked fellow, and let the people call me an enemy 
of my preceptor and master. All the same by your grace may my devotion to the feet of 
Sita and Sri Rama grow day by day. The cloud may neglect the Cataka bird all its life 
and on its asking water may discharge thunderbolt and hail. But the bird will fall in the 
estimation of others if it ceases to call out to the cloud. It will gain in everyway only by 
intensifying its love for the latter. Just as gold gets brighter by being put into the fire, even 
so the lover shines by sticking to his vow of devotion to the feet of his most beloved 
lord." In response to Bharata's prayer there came a sweet and benedictory utterance 
from the midst of the Triveni: "Dear Bharata, you are pious in everyway and your love 
for Sri Rama's feet is unbounded. In vain do you harbour depressing thoughts in your 
mind; there is no one so dear to Rama as you are." (1 — 4) 

A thrill ran through Bharata's body and his soul rejoiced to hear the agreeable 
words of the (deity presiding over) Triveni. Exclaiming "Bharata is praiseworthy, all praise 
to him!" the gods joyfully rained flowers. (205) 




AYODHYA-KANDA 
551 

Chapter 77

The inhabitants of Prayaga (the king of sacred places), including anchorites, 
religious students, householders and recluses, were transported with joy. same persons 
gathered together and said to one another, "Bharata's affection and amiability are 
artless and genuine." Hearing of Sri Rama's charming virtues he came to the great 
sage Bharadvaja. The sage saw him falling prostrate before him and looked upon him 
as his own good-luck personified. Running up and lifting him the sage clasped him to 
his bosom and gratified him by bestowing his blessing on him. Offered a seat by the 
sage he sat down with his head bent low, as if he would run away and hide his face 
in a den of bashfulness. He felt much perturbed at the thought that the sage might 
ask him any question. Seeing his amiability and confusion of mind the sage said to 
him, "Listen, Bharata! I have already heard everything; but we have no control over the 
doings of Fate.” (1 — 4) 
"Be not distressed at heart by the thought of what your mother has done. It is no 
fault of Kaikeyi, dear child; it was the goddess of speech who deluded her mind." (206) 

552 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


"Nobody would approve of it even if I said so; for the wise recognize worldly 
opinion as well as the judgment of the Vedas. By singing your unsullied glory, however, 
the world and the Vedas both will be exalted. The world as well as the Vedas admit it 
and everyone says that of king's sons he alone gets the throne on whom his father 
bestows it. The king, who was above all true to his vow, would have called you and 
bestowed the kingdom on you; and this would have brought him joy, religious merit and 
glory. But the root of all trouble was Rama's exile to the forest and the whole universe 
was pained to hear of it. It was, however, as fate would have it; much as the foolish 
queen (Kaikeyi) did wrong, she now repents for it. But he who lays the least blame for 
it on you is vile, ignorant and wicked. Even if you accepted the sovereignty no blame 
would attach to you and even Rama would have been gratified to hear of it." (1 — 4) 

"But what you have done now is excellent; your standpoint is quite justified. For 
devotion to Sri Rama's feet is the root of all choice blessings in the world." (207) 
* AYODHYA-KANDA * 553 
 "And that is your wealth and life, nay, your vital breath. Who is, then, so highly 
blessed as you? This is, however, not to be wondered at in your case, who are a son 
of King Dasaratha and a beloved brother of Rama. I tell you, Bharata, there is no one 
held so dear in his heart by the Chief of Raghu's line as you. Laksmana, Rama and Sita 
most fondly praised you the whole night. I came to know the secret only when they were 
bathing at Prayaga; they would feel overwhelmed with love for you. The Chief of Raghu's 
line cherishes the same love for you as a fool does for a life of ease in this world. This 
is, however, no great tribute to the Hero of Raghu's race, who cherishes the whole family 
of the suppliant. As for yourself, Bharata, my opinion is that you are the very incarnation 
of love for Rama." (1 — 4) 
 “What, to your mind, constitutes a slur on you is a lesson to us all. The 
present occasion has proved very propitious for preparing elixir in the form of 
devotion of Rama." (208) 
"Your glory, dear child, is a new type of spotless moon as it were; while Rama's 
devotees are like so many water-lilies (that open only in moonlight) and Cakora birds 

554 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

(that are equally fond of the moon). It shall always remain above the horizon and shall 
never set; nay, it shall never wane and shall ever wax in the heavens of this world. The 
Cakravaka bird in the shape of the three worlds shall cherish great love for it, while the 
sun in the shape of the Lord's glory shall never rob it of its splendour. It shall ever 
delight everyone by day as well as by night and the demon Rahu in the form of 
Kaikeyi's doings shall never eclipse it. It is full of nectar in the form of ideal love for 
Rama and is untarnished by any stain resulting from a wrong done to the Guru.* Let 
Rama's devotees now enjoy nectar to their heart's content since you have made it so 
easy of access even on earth. Of your forbears King Bhagirathaf brought down the 
celestial river, the very thought of which is a fountain of all choice blessings. As for 
Dasaratha's virtues they are more than one can describe. In the world there is none else 
even equal to you how then any one can be superior to you. (1 — 4) 
"Won by his affection and meekness Sri Rama Himself appeared on earth — Rama 
whom even Siva always saw him with his mental eyes but never satiated." (209) 
* It is mentioned in the Puranas that Brhaspati, the preceptor of the gods, on one occasion, when he 
was returning from a bath in the Ganga, found his wife, Tara, with the moon-god and threw his dripping robe 
at him and hit him in the face, thus causing the spots that are still to be seen there. 

t The descent of the celestial river, Ganga, to the earth is associated with the name of King 
BhagTratha, who is said to have practised austere penance for 1000 years and eventually succeeded in 
bringing down the stream. The Puranas tell us how King Sagara, an ancestor of the illustrious BhagTratha, 
performed a horse sacrifice. The horse released by the king prior to the sacrifice was. 

King Sagara's sons, 60,000 in number, went out in quest of the horse and dug the earth on all sides. 
While digging the earth in the north-east they found the horse by the side of the divine sage Kapila, who sat 
absorbed in meditation in the nether regions. The foolish and haughty princes took the sage for a thief and 
abusing him right and left ran to assault him. The sage now opened his eyes and lo! as a result of their offence 
the princes were instantly reduced to ashes by a fire which emanated from their body. 

King Sagara had another son, Asamahjasa by name. His son, Arhsuman, who was much devoted to 
his grandfather, proceeded in search of the horse under orders of the king, and found the animal near the 
ashes of his uncles. He also beheld the great sage Kapila and supplicated to him. The sage, who was 
pleased with his prayer, told him that the horse belonged to his grandfather and asked him to take it back. The 
sage further told him about the death of his uncles and added that the latter could attain salvation only if their 
remains could be washed by the Ganga . Arhsuman took the horse to his grandfather, who duly performed the 
horse sacrifice and then retired to the woods after installing his grandson on the throne of Ayodhya. 

King Arhsuman and his son Dilipa successively practised austere for a number of years with a view to 
bringing the Ganga down to the mortal plane, but in vain Dilipa's son, BhagTratha, at last succeeded in 
bringing the stream to the earth and took it to the place, where his uncles had lain in the form of ashes. The 
moment the water of the Ganga touched their remains their spirits were absolved from the sin of insulting a 
holy sage and ascended to heaven. Such is the glory of the Ganga, which is stated to have emanated from the 
feet of Bhagavan Visnu Himself. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


555 
"You have created the peerless moon of your glory, which bears on it the figure 
of a deer* in the shape of love for Rama. You feel distressed at heart, dear son, for no 
purpose: you fear poverty even though you have found the philosopher's stone. Listen, 
Bharata — I tell no falsehood, I am an ascetic dwelling in the forest and having no concern 
with the world — I obtained the happy and excellent reward of all spiritual practices when 
I saw Laksmana, Rama and STta. The reward of that reward itself is your sight, It is great 
fortune for prayaga as well as all of us. Bharata, you deserve all praise since by your 
glory you have conquered the whole world.” As he concluded his speech the sage was 
overwhelmed with love. Those who were assembled there rejoiced to hear the sage’s 
words, while the gods acclaimed Bharata and rained flowers on him. Even as Bharata 
heard the shouts of applause in the heavens as well as in Prayaga he was overwhelmed 
with emotion. (1 — 4) 

Experiencing a thrill of joy all over his body, with his heart full of STta and Rama 
and his lotus eyes wet with tears he made obeisance to the conclave of sages and thus 
spoke in a voice choked with emotion: (210) 
* The spot in the moon is represented by the Hindus as a deer even as it is presented in European 
nurseries as the form of a man. 

556 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

"Here is an assembly of sages and we stand at a place which is known as the king 
of sacred places. Great harm will come to a man if he states even a fact on oath at such 
a place. And if one tells a lie there will be no greater sin and depravity. I speak out the 
truth knowing as I do that you are all-wise, while the Lord of Raghus has access to the 
inmost recesses of one's heart. Do not mind I am not semful for what my mother has done 
nor am I troubled at heart over the thought that the world will look upon me as mean. 
I fear not lest I should spoil my future life nor do I grieve over my father's death, whose 
meritorious deeds and fair renown shine forth throughout the universe, who had sons like 
Laksmana and Sri Rama, and who quitted his frail body as a result of his separation from 
Sri Rama. Thus there is hardly any occasion for lamentation on his account. What pains 
me is that dressing themselves as hermits Sri Rama, Laksmana and Sita roam from forest 
to forest without shoes on their feet.” (1 — 4) 

"Clad in deerskin, living on bare fruits, reposing on the ground overspread with 
Kusa grass and leaves and halting under trees they ever endure cold and sunshine, rain 
and storm!" (211) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


557 
"It is this burning agony which is ever consuming my breast, so that I feel no appetite 
by day and get no sleep at night. For this fell disease there is no remedy: I have mentally 
ransacked the whole world. My mother's evil counsel was like a sinful carpenter, who used 
my interests as an adze and fashioned out of the inauspicious wood of discord a destructive 
magical contrivance and muttering the terrible malevolent spell of (Sri Rama's) exile for a 
fixed term (of fourteen years) planted it (in the soil of Ayodhya).* It is for my sake that she 
employed this infamous contrivance and brought ruin on the whole world. This calamity will 
cease only when Sri Rama returns; by no other means can Ayodhya thrive again." The 
sage (Bharadvaja) was gratified to hear Bharata's words and everyone applauded him in 
ways more than one. "Grieve not much, dear child; all your woes will disappear the moment 
you behold Sri Rama's feet." (1 — 4) 
After comforting him (thus) the chief of the sages, Bharadvaja, said, "Be my 
beloved guest and deign to accept the bulbs, roots, fruits and flowers that we may 
offer you." (212) 
* This evidently refers to a magical contrivance, intended to drive out an enemy from his home, in 
which wood is cut during a particular period from the tree known as the helleric myrobalan and after 
fashioning a pin out of it the same is planted in the enemy's house with the recitation of some spells. This is believed to bring the desired result. 
558 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
On hearing the sage's words Bharata was troubled at heart; for he was faced with 
a hard puzzle at a difficult time. Then, realizing the the importance of what the elder's say 
he adored the sage's feet and replied with joined palms, "Your orders must be respectfully 
obeyed; this is my paramount duty, my lord." Bharata's reply pleased the great sage 
(Bharadvaja), who called his trusty servants and pupils by his side. "Bharata ought to be 
entertained; therefore, go and bring bulbs, roots and fruits." They bowed their heads with 
the words 'very well, sir!' and most gladly proceeded to take charge of their respective 
duties. The sage anxiously thought that he had invited a distinguished guest and that a 
deity must be worshipped according to his or her rank. Hearing of this riches of various 
kinds (Riddhis) and supernatural powers (Siddhis) like Anima (the power of assuming 
atomic size) appeared (in a visible form) and said, "We are prepared to do your bidding, 
O lord." (1—4) 
"Bharata as well as his younger brother (Satrughna) and the whole company are 
distressed due to their separation from Rama. Entertain them and relieve them of their 
fatigue," the great sage gladly said. (213) 

Chapter 79
The riches and supernatural powers in their embodied forms bowed to the 
command of the great sage and deemed themselves highly favoured. The Siddhis said 
to one another, "Sri Rama's younger brother (Bharata) is a guest beyond compare. 
Bowing at the sage's feet let us do that which may gratify the whole of the royal party. 
So saying they erected beautiful dwellings of various patterns, which put to shame by their 
appearance the aerial cars of gods. They were replete with abundant luxuries and 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


559 


splendours, which were coveted by immortals. Equipped with necessaries of all kinds 
men-servants and maid-servants remained in attendance focussing their attention on the 
pleasure of the guests. The Siddhis provided in an instant all the amenities which cannot 
be dreamt of even in heaven. First of all they assigned to each of the guests quarters 
that were charming and comfortable and suited to the taste of the occupant. (1 — 4) 
Thereafter Bharata and his family were assigned quarters; for such were the 
instructions given by the sage. By dint of his penance the great sage pravede wealth that 
astonished the Creator (Brahma) himself. (214) 

When Bharata beheld the sage's power, the realms of all the rulers of the spheres 
looked small in his eyes. The luxuries were more than one could describe; the wise 
would forget their dispassion on seeing them. There were seats and couches, drapery, 
canopies, groves and gardens, birds and beasts of different species, sweet-scented 
flowers and fruits tasting like ambrosia, many a lake and pond of limpid water, foods and 
drinks of an undefiled and innocent character, which were more delicious than nectar 
and ambrosia, and which the guests would hesitate to accept like so many ascetics. 
Every house was supplied with a celestial cow (the cow of plenty) and a tree of paradise; 
Indra (the king of gods) and his consort, SacT, grew covetous at their sight. It was the 
vernal season and a cool, fragrant and gentle breeze was blowing. Everyone had all the 
four prizes of life (viz., religious merit, worldly riches, sensuous enjoyment and final 
beatitude) within one’s easy reach. At the sight of luxuries like garlands, sandal-paste 
and women the guests were overcome by a mixed feeling of joy and sorrow (joy at the 

560 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
unique hospitality shown by the sage by dint of his Yogic powers and sorrow because 
at a time when they should abstain from luxuries of every kind they were being offered 
the same). (1 — 4) 
Affluence, like a female Cakravaka bird, and Bharata, as her mate, were imprisoned 
together that night in the cage of the hermitage by the sage’s order, which was a sart 
play. And they remained there till it was dawn.* (215) 
Bharata and his party took a dip into the Triveni (the confluence of the Gariga, 
Yamuna and Sarasvati), the chief of sacred places, and bowed their head to the sage 
(Bharadvaja). Bharata reverently received his orders and blessings and prostrating himself 
made much supplication. Accompanied by expert guides and taking the whole host along- 
with him he proceeded on his journey with his thoughts directed towards Citrakuta. Holding 
Sri Rama’s friend (Guha) by the hand he walked along like the very incarnation of love. He 
had no shoes and no umbrella over his head; and his love, self-discipline, austerity and piety 
were unfeigned. He asked his friend (Guha) to give an account of the wanderings of 
Laksmana, Sri Rama and Sita; while Guha narrated the same in soft accents. When he 


* The metaphor is intended to show that just as a Cakravaka pair would never unite even though caught in a cage and would spend the whole night turning their back upon each other, likewise Bharata did not even care to look at the luxuries in the midst of which he was forced to remain overnight. He kept 
scrupulously aloof from them. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
561 
saw the spots where Sri Rama had rested and the trees under which he had halted the 
emotion within his breast could not be repressed. The gods who beheld his condition rained 
down flowers; the earth grew soft and the road became pleasant. (1 — 4) 
The clouds afforded him shade all along and a delightful and excellent breeze 
kept blowing. The journey was not so agreeable to Sri Rama as it proved to be for 
Bharata. (216) 

The numberless beings, both animate and inanimate, that saw the Lord or were 
seen by the Lord in their turn, had been rendered fit for the highest state; the sight of 
Bharata now finally rid them of the disease of transmigration. This was no great thing for 
Bharata, whom Sri Rama ever cherished in His heart. “Even they who utter the name 
of Rama only once in this world not only reach the other shore themselves but are also 
able to take others across. As for Bharata, he is dearly loved by Sri Rama and is His 
younger brother too. No wonder, then, that the journey should be delightful to him,” 
Siddhas (a class of celestial beings), saints and great sages observed thus and rejoiced 
at heart to behold Bharata. Indra (the chief of gods) was filled with anxiety when he saw 
Bharata’s power. The world is good to the good and vile for the vile. He said to his 
preceptor (the sage Brhaspati), “Something must be done, my lord, to prevent the 
meeting between Rama and Bharata.” (1 — 4) 
562 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “Sri Rama is scrupulous by nature and is won by love, while Bharata is an ocean 
of affection. What has already been accomplished thus threatens to be undone; 
therefore, finding out some stratagem let us use it as a remedial measure.” (217) 
Hearing his words the preceptor of the gods smiled and realized that, though 
endowed with a thousand eyes, Indra was really blind, (lacked discernment). He said, 
“If anyone practises deception on a devotee of Sri Rama (the Lord of Maya), it recoils 
on the artificer himself. O king of gods! Last time we did something knowing that it had 
Sri Rama’s tacit approval; but by resorting to some underhand means this time we are 
sure to meet with disaster. Listen, O lord of gods; it is Sri Rama’s nature not to be angry 
at any offence against Himself. But he who sins against His devotees is surely 
consumed in the fire of His wrath. The story is well known both in the world as 
well as in the Vedas: the sage Durvasa* knows this glorious trait of Sri Rama’s character. 

* We read in the Puranas how the sage Durvasa, who is believed to be an incarnation of Lord Siva 
and was noted for his irascible nature, once called on King AmbarTsa, a great devotee of Bhagavan Visnu. It 
happened to be a DvadasT (the twelfth day of a lunar fortnight). The king naturally invited the sage to dine at 
his palace and the latter accepted his invitation and went to the river bank to take his bath. The king had fasted 
on the previous day and according to the scriptural injunctions it was necessary that he should break his fast 
while it was DvadasT. The sage, however, did not return in time and the pious king would never break his fast 
until the sage had taken his meals. He was, therefore in a fix and consulted Brahmanas on the point. The 
Brahmanas advised the king to observe the formality of breaking his fast by sipping a spoonful of water in 
which the feet of the Lord’s image had been immersed. By doing so he would not be guilty of dining before the 
invitee and would also be saved from the offence of not breaking his fast during the DvadasT. No sooner had 
the king sipped the holy water than the sage returned from the river bank and flew into a rage when he learnt 
that the king had broken his fast and did not await his return. He pulled out a hair from his head and produced 
therefrom a demoness known by the name of Krtya, which ran to devour the king. AmbarTsa, who had 
dedicated himself to the feet of the Lord, and absolutely depended on Him, remained standing where he was 
and neither shrank out of fear nor made any attempt to save himself. 

The Lord, however, would not allow his devotee to die without any fault of his and despatched 
His own discus, Sudarsana, to save his life. The discus ran after the demoness and having disposed of 
her pursued the sage himself, who ran for his life and wandered throughout the universe for full one year, 
who is there who loves Rama as Bharata loves. World repeats Rama’s name where Rama 
repeats name of Bharata. (1 — 4) 
Never harbour in your mind, O Lord of the immortals, even the thought of 
frustrating the purpose of a devotee of Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghu’s line); for the same 
will bring you infamy in this world, sorrow in the next and a series of woes in your day- 
to-day life. (218) 
“Hear our advice, O king of gods! A devotee is supremely dear to Sri Rama; He 
is gratified through service rendered to His devotees, and bears great enmity to those 
who are hostile to them. Even though the Lord is alike to all without either love or anger 
and receives neither sin nor virtue, neither merit nor demerit, and even though He has 
made Fate the ruling factor in this world, so that one reaps what one sows, yet according 
as one possesses the heart of a devotee or an unbeliever He appears to be impartial or 
hostile in His dealings. Though devoid of attributes, unattached, free from pride and ever 
unchanged, Sri Rama has assumed a form with attributes yielding to the love of His 
but none afforded him shelter. Even Bhagavan Visnu pleaded His helplessness and asked him to 
approach the king himself and ask for his forgiveness. The king, who was too good to harbour any ill- 
will against the sage and out of sympathy for him had remained without any food ever since he left, was 
moved to pity at his predicament and prayed to the Lord’s weapon, Sudarsana, to spare the Brahmana. 
Sudarsana granted the king’s prayer and left. The sage, who now realized the king’s greatness, fell at 
his feet and craved for his forgiveness for what he had done. The king in his turn felt sorry for the hardships which the sage had to suffer on his account and bade him good-bye after entertaining him to a sumptuous dinner and showing him every respect. 

564 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
devotees. Sri Rama has ever respected the wishes of His devotees: the Vedas and 
Puranas as well as saints and gods can bear testimony to this. Bearing this in mind give 
up perversity and cherish ideal love for Bharata’s feet.” (1 — 4) 
“Sri Rama’s devotees are actively engaged doing good to others, share the 
sorrows of others and are compassionate by nature. And Bharata is the very crest-jewel 
of devotees; therefore, be not afraid of him, O ruler of gods.” (219) 


“ The Lord is true to His word and a friend of the gods, while Bharata obeys Sri 
Rama’s orders. You are feeling uneasy only because you are dominated by self-interest. 
Bharata is not to blame at all; it is your ignorance (which is responsible for your uneasiness).” 
The chief of gods, Indra, was overjoyed at heart to hear these valuable words of the 
heavenly preceptor and his depression of spirit was gone. The lord of celestials, therefore, 
rained down flowers and gladly began to extol Bharata’s noble disposition. In this way 
Bharata went on his way, while sages and Siddhas were filled with envy at the sight of his 
condition. Whenever he heaved a long sigh with the word ‘Rama’ on his lips, it seemed as 
if love overflowed on all sides. Even adamant and stones melted at his words; the love of 
the citizens was beyond description. Halting at one place on this side the party arrived on 
the bank of the Yamuna and Bharata’s eyes were filled with tears as he gazed on its dark 
water (which reminded him of Sri Rama’s swarthy form). (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
565 
At the sight of the lovely stream that possessed the same hue as the person of 
Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghu’s line) Bharata and his party were plunged into an ocean 
of grief on account of separation from Sri Rama and were saved from drowning only by 
boarding the bark of discretion. (220) 
That day they halted on the bank of the Yamuna; everyone was provided with 
comforts according to the occasion. In course of the night innumerable boats of untold 
varieties came from all the ghats. At daybreak the whole party crossed the river in a 
single trip; everyone was pleased with the services rendered by the Nisada chief in 
this behalf. After performing their ablutions and bowing their heads to the river 
(Yamuna) the two brothers (Bharata and Satrughna) resumed their journey with the 
lord of Nisadas. At the head of the line in chosen vehicles travelled the principal sages 
(Vamadeva, Vasistha and so on), followed by the royal host. Next followed the two 
royal brothers, both on foot; their ornaments, costumes and style of dress were all of 
the very simplest. They were accompanied by their servants, friends and the minister’s 
son and went with their thoughts fixed on Laksmana, Sita and the Lord of Raghus. 
They lovingly saluted each and every place where Sri Rama had either encamped or 
rested awhile. (1 — 4) 
Hearing the news the men and women who lived by the roadside left their 

566 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
household work and ran after the royal travellers, and having seen their comely form and 
affection they all rejoiced on attaining the reward of their life. (221) 
One woman lovingly said to another, “Friend, can they be Rama and Laksmana 
or not? Their age, constitution, complexion and comeliness of form are the same, dear 
companion; their amiability and affection are also similar and their gait too resembles that 
of Rama and Laksmana. Only their dress is not the same and they are not accompanied 
by Sita, my friend; and an army complete in its four limbs (viz., horse and foot, elephants 
and chariots) is marching before them. Moreover, they do not wear a cheerful countenance 
and their heart is heavy with sorrow. This difference makes me doubt their identity with 
Rama and Laksmana, O friend.” Her argument appealed to the rest of the women; they 
said, “There is none so clever as she.” Applauding the latter and admiring the truth of her 
remarks another woman spoke in sweet accents. She lovingly narrated the whole 
episode as to how the festivities in connection with Sri Rama’s installation had been 
obstructed. She then began to praise Bharata’s amiability, affection, genial disposition 
and goodluck. (1 — 4) 
 “Journeying on foot, living on fruits and relinquishing the sovereignty bestowed by 
his father, Bharata is proceeding to persuade the chief of Raghu’s line to return. Who can 
equal Bharata today? (222) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
567 

“Bharata’s brotherly affection, devotion and conduct dispel the woes and evil of 
those who talk or hear of them. Whatever may be said with regard to them, dear friend, 
will be quite inadequate; it is no wonder that a brother of Rama should be like that. All 
of us who have seen Bharata and his younger brother have become praiseworthy among 
women.” Hearing of his virtues and seeing his forlorn state they lamented, “Surely he 
is not a fit son for such a vile mother as Kaikeyi.” Someone said, “The queen-mother 
(KaikeyT) is not to blame at all; all this has been accomplished by God, who is so 
favourably disposed to us. Of what account are we, vile women, excluded both from 
secular and Vedic rites and impure by birth as well as by doings, who dwell in an 
accursed region (woodland) and in a wretched village and are the worst of our class, that 
we should have such a sight, which is a reward of great religious merit?” There was a 
similar rejoicing and wonder in every village: it seemed as if a celestial tree had sprung 
up in a desert. (1 — 4) 
At the sight of Bharata the good fortune of the people by the roadside manifested 
itself as though by the will of Providence Prayaga had been brought within easy reach 
of the people of Sirhhala (Ceylon). (223) 

568 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Hearing his own praises as well as of Sri Rama’s virtues Bharata went on his way, 
thinking of Sri Rama. Whenever he happened to see holy waters he bathed in them and 
whenever he caught sight of a hermitage or a temple he made obeisance to it, asking 
in his heart only one boon, viz., devotion to the lotus-feet of Sita and Rama. Whomsoever 
he met, be he a Kola or any other forester or even if he were an anchorite, a religious 
student, a recluse or a hermit, he would salute him and enquire in which part of the forest 
were Laksmana, Rama and Videha’s daughter (Sita). They told him all the news of the 
Lord and at the sight of Bharata obtained the reward of their life. Those persons who said 
they had seen the Lord doing well were counted as dear as Sri Rama and Laksmana 
themselves. Thus in polite phrases he would make enquiries from all and hear the story 
of Sri Rama’s forest life. (1 — 4) 
Halting that day in a suitable place he resumed his journey early next morning 
invoking the Lord of Raghus. Just like Bharata everyone who accompanied him longed 
for a sight of Sri Rama. (224) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
569 
Auspicious omens occurred to everyone; they had happy throbbings in their eyes 
and arms. Bharata and his whole host rejoiced at the thought that they would be able to 
see Sri Rama and the sting of their sorrows would come to an end. Each indulged in his 
own fancy and all went intoxicated with the wine of love; their limbs were getting out of 
control, their legs tottered and they spoke words in an incoherent way due to emotion. 
Sri Rama’s friend (Guha) presently pointed to Bharata the crest-jewel of mountains 
(Kamadagiri), which was naturally charming and in the vicinity of which on the bank of 
the river Payasvini dwelt the two brothers (Sri Rama and Laksmana) alongwith Sita. 
Catching sight of the mountain all fell prostrate on the ground with the cries of "Glory to 
Sri Rama, the life of Janaka's daughter!" The royal host was so overwhelmed with 
emotion as though the Chief of Raghu's line had turned back towards Ayodhya. (1 — 4) 
Bharata's love at that time was more than Sesa (the thousand-headed serpent- 
king) could describe. It is as unapproachable to the poet as the bliss of absorption into 
Brahma to those who are tainted by egotism and mineness. (225) 
Being all overpowered by love for tl 
distance of only four miles by the time the 

ie Chief of Raghu's line they had covered a 
sun set. Perceiving a suitable site and water 

570 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
close by they halted and at the close of night the beloved of Sri Rama resumed his 
journey. There Sri Rama awoke while it was yet dark. Sita saw in a dream that very night 
as if Bharata had come with his retinue and that his body was tormented by the agony 
of separation from his lord. All who had accompanied him were sad at heart, miserable 
and afflicted; while Her mothers-in-law She found changed in appearance. On hearing of 
Sita's dream Sri Rama's eyes filled with tears and He who rids others of their sorrow 
became sorrowful. "This dream, Laksmana, bodes no good; somebody will break terribly 
bad news." Saying so He took His bath with His brother and worshipping the Enemy of 
Tripura, Lord Siva, paid His respects to holy men. (1 — 4) 
After adoring the gods and reverencing the hermits He sat down gazing to the 
north. There was dust in the air and a host of birds and beasts had taken to flight in panic 
and were making their way to the Lord's hermitage. Says TulasTdasa: He stood up when 
He saw this and wondered in his heart what could be the reason. Presently the Kolas 
and Kiratas came and told Him all the news. 

When He heard the delightful words He felt overjoyed at heart. A thrill ran through 
His body and His eyes, that resembled the autumnal lotus, says TulasTdasa, filled with 
the tears of affection. (226) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


571 
Sita's lord became anxious the very next moment. "What can be the reason of 
Bharata's arrival?" Then somebody came and spoke to Him thus: "He has with him no 
small army complete in its four limbs (viz., foot, horse, elephants and chariots)." Hearing 
this Sri Rama felt much disturbed. On the one hand there was His father's command, 
on the other His regard for His younger brother (Bharata). Realizing Bharata's disposition 
in His heart, the Lord found no proposition to fix His mind upon. Then He consoled 
Himself with the thought that Bharata was submissive, good and reasonable. Laksmana 
saw that the Lord was troubled at heart, and spoke what prudence demanded on the 
occasion: "I make bold, my lord, to say something unasked; but a servant ceases to be 
impertinent if his impertinence is not inopportune. You, my master, are the crest-jewel of 
the all-wise; yet I, your servant, tell you my own mind.” (1 — 4) 

"You, my master, are loving by nature and guileless of heart and a storehouse of 
amiability and affection. You love and trust everyone and know all to be just like 
yourself." (227) 
572 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

"Fools given to the pleasures of sense are seized with infatuation on attaining 
power and reveal their true nature. Bharata was righteous, good and wise and his 
devotion to the Lord's feet is known to the whole world. But now that he has attained Sri 
Rama's (Your) position (as the ruler of Ayodhya) even he has transgressed the bounds 
of righteousness. Finding an adverse situation and knowing that you are alone in the 
forest, this wily and wicked brother has plotted an evil design and after making due 
preparations has come to make his sovereignty secure. Planning all sorts of wicked 
schemes the two brothers have collected an army and marched here. If they had no wily 
intention and roguery at heart, who should like to bring chariots, horses and elephants? 
But why should one blame Bharata for nothing when we know that anyone in the world 
would be driven mad on attaining sovereignty?” (1 — 4) 
"The moon-god committed adultery with the wife of his Guru (the sage Brhaspati), 
while Nahusa mounted a palanquin borne by Brahmanas; and there was none so vile as 
King Vena,* an enemy of established usage as well as of the Vedic injunctions.” (228) 

* Vena was born of King Ariga (a descendant of the celebrated devotee Dhruva), and SunTtha (a 
daughter of Mrtyu, the god of death). Being thus descended from Adharma (the spirit presiding over 
unrighteousness, the father of Mrtyu) on the mother's side, Vena was born with vicious propensities and grew 
to be the bane of society. Fed up with his atrocities and unable to correct him, King Ariga left his capital one 
night and retired to an unknown destination. Seeing the kingdom masterless Bhrgu and other sages installed 
Vena on the throne, even though the ministers were opposed to his installation. Power turned his head all the 
more and arrogantly accounting himself as greater than all he began to insult exalted souls. He went the 
length of banning the performance of sacrifices and even charity and thus put a stop to all pious acts and the 
pursuit of religion. 

When the sages perceived that the tyranny of the monarch was overstepping all bounds they felt sorry 
for having installed him on the throne. They, therefore, met and decided to expostulate with the king and 
persuade him, if possible, to desist from his evil ways. They further resolved to dispose of him in case he did 
not come round. The sages approached the king accordingly and admonished him but in vain. This enraged 
the sages, who killed him by the very sound of 'Hum'. 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
573 
"King Sahasrabahu, Indra (the lord of celestials) and King Trisahku* (father of 
Hariscandra) — which of these was not brought into disrepute by the intoxication of 
kingly power? Bharata has resorted to a right expedient; for one should leave no trace 
of one's enemy or debt in any case. But he has made one mistake in that he has 
despised Sri Rama (yourself) as forlorn. And he will realize his mistake with vengeance 
today when he beholds Sri Rama's (your) indignant face on the battlefield." Even as 
he said so he forgot his love of propriety and the tree of his bellicose spirit burst into 
flowers in the shape of horripilation. Adoring the Lord’s feet and placing their dust on 
his head he spoke, revealing his own real and natural might: “Pray do not take offence, 
my lord, if I tell you that Bharata has provoked me not a little. After all how long shall 
I endure this and restrain my passion when my lord (yourself) is with me and the bow 
in my hand?” (1 — 4) 
 “A Ksatriya (warrior) by caste and born in the race of Raghu I am known 
throughout the world as a servant of Sri Rama (yourself). (How, then, can I put up with 
such insult?) What is so low as the dust (on a road)? But if you were to kick it up it would 
rise to your head.” (229) 
* Trisatiku, son of Trayyaruni, was a king of Ayodhya. He wanted to perform a sacrifice whereby he 
could bodily ascend to heaven. His priest Vasistha, however, refused to conduct such a sacrifice, which he 
said was unauthorized and futile. Vasistha's sons too declined on the same grounds. But Trisahku turned a 
deaf ear to their remonstrances. This enraged Vasistha's sons, who cursed him that he should fall in the social 
scale and be accounted a pariah. The king was thus converted into a Candala and was accordingly forsaken 
by his kinsmen, ministers and subjects too. Much agitated at heart over this, the ex-king now approached the 
sage Visvamitra, who comforted him; and asking his sons to invite other sages he conducted the sacrifice. 
Vasistha's sons, however, ruled that at a sacrifice commenced by a pariah and conducted by a non- 
Brahmana priest (for such was Visvamitra till then) no gods would appear. The gods respected this ruling and 
accordingly no god appeared to accept the offerings. By dint of his own penance Visvamitra sent Trisahku to 
heaven; but the gods hurled him down. Exasperated at this Visvamitra proceeded to create another heaven 
and began to shape new heavenly bodies. The gods were dismayed at this and sought a conference with 
Visvamitra. It was ultimately decided by mutual agreement that Visvamitra should abandon his plan to create 
a new heaven and Trisahku should remain hanging in the air. He is still seen in the form of a triple luminary 
in the heavens. The saliva that dropped from his mouth forms the river Karmanasa, which flows between 
Varanasi and Bihar and the water of which is considered as ever polluted. 

574 
As he rose and with joined palms asked leave (to meet Bharata in an encounter), 
it seemed as if the heroic sentiment itself had awoke from sleep. Binding up the matted 
locks on his head and fastening the quiver to his waist he strung his bow and took an 
arrow in his hand. “Let me distinguish myself as a servant of Sri Rama today and teach 
Bharata a lesson in the battle. Reaping the fruit of their contempt for Sri Rama let the two 
brothers sleep on the couch of the battlefield. It is well that the whole host has collected 
at one place; I shall, therefore, give vent to my past anger. Even as a lion (the king of 
beasts) tears to pieces a herd of elephants or just as a hawk clutches and carries off 
a lark, so shall I lightly overthrow on the field Bharata as well as his younger brother 
(Satrughna) and all their host. Even if Lord Sankara comes to his aid, I swear by Sri 
Rama that I will kill him in battle.” (1 — 4) 
Seeing Laksmana speak with such vehemence and fury and hearing his solemn 
oath all the spheres trembled with fear, while their rulers were anxious to flee away 
in panic. (230) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


575 
The world was seized with terror and a voice was heard in the air extolling the 
enormous strength of Laksmana’s arm: “Who can tell, dear child, nay, who even knows 
your might and glory? But before doing anything one must judge whether it is right or 
wrong; then everyone would approve of it. They who act impulsively and repent 
afterwards are anything but wise: so declare the Vedas and the sages.” On hearing this 
voice from heaven Laksmana felt abashed; but both Sri Rama and Sita greeted him 
and said: “What you have said, dear Laksmana, is sound wisdom; the intoxication of 
kingly power is the worst of all. But of those rulers who have tasted it they alone lose 
their head who have never waited on an assembly of saints. As for Bharata, I tell you, 
Laksmana, in the whole of God’s creation I have never seen or heard of anyone so 
good as he.” (1 — 4) 
 “Bharata would never be intoxicated with sovereign power even if he attained to 
the position of Brahma, Visnu or Siva. What ! Can a few drops of Kaji* ever split the 
ocean of milk? (231) 

* A sour and savoury drink prepared by dissolving powdered rye seeds into water and preserving it for 
a few days. 




576 
Chapter 80

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Darkness may swallow the midday sun, and sooner may the heavens be absorbed 
into a cloud or the jar-born sage Agastya (who is stated to have drunk off the ocean in 
a single draught) be drowned in the water collected in a cow’s footprint: nay the earth 
may abandon its natural forbearance and Mount Meru be blown away by a puff of wind 
discharged from the mouth of a mosquito; but Bharata will never be intoxicated by kingly 
power, O brother. Laksmana, I swear by you as well as by our father that there is no 
brother so good and innocent as Bharata. God, dear brother, creates the world by mixing 
the milk of goodness with the water of evil; while Bharata is a swan, born in the lake of 
the solar race, that has sifted goodness from evil. Choosing the milk of goodness and 
discarding the water of evil he has illumined the world by his glory.” Even as the Lord 
of Raghus extolled Bharata’s virtues, amiability and noble disposition He was drowned 
in an ocean of love. (1 — 4) 
On hearing the speech of Sri Rama (the chief of Raghu’s line) and seeing His 
affection for Bharata all the gods were full of applause and said, “who else is such a 
gracious lord as Sri Rama? (232) 
 “Had Bharata not been born into the world, who on this earth would have 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


577 
championed the cause of virtue in its entirety? Who else than you, O Lord of Raghus, 
can know Bharata’s good qualities, which are unaproachable even to the race of bards?” 
On hearing the words of the gods, Laksmana, Sri Rama and Sita were more delighted 
than words can tell. There Bharata with all his host bathed in the sacred Mandakini. 
Then, leaving all the people on the riverside and taking permission of his mothers, 
preceptor (the sage Vasistha) and the minister (Sumantra) he proceeded to the spot 
where Sita and §ri Rama were, taking the Nisada chief and his younger brother 
(Satrughna) with him. As he thought of what his mother had done, he felt diffident and 
formed ill-conjectures of every kind in his mind: “God forbid that Sri Rama, Laksmana 
and Sita leave the place on hearing my name and shift to some other place! (1 — 4) 
 “Taking me to be an accomplice of my mother, nothing that he might do would be 
too much. But looking to his own self, I am sure, he will forgive my faults and receive 
me kindly.” (233) 
"Whether He shuns me as one possessing a black heart or welcomes me as his 
own servant, my only refuge are Sri Rama’s shoes; he is really a noble master while the 
whole blame lies with his servant (myself). The only beings deserving of fame in the 
world are the Cataka bird and the fish, who are clever in keeping ever fresh their vow 
of fidelity and love.” Revolving these thoughts in his mind he went on his journey, his 
whole body rendered powerless by diffidence and affection. The sinful act of his mother 
(KaikeyT) dragged him back as it were; while the strength of his devotion pressed him 
forward, foremost among the resolute as he was. Whenever he thought of Sri Rama’s 
578 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
good nature his feet moved quickly along the way. Bharata’s gait at that time resembled 
the movements of a water-fly carried along a stream. Seeing Bharata’s anxiety and 
affection at that moment the Nisada chief forgot all about himself. (1 — 4) 
Auspicious omens occurred and the Nisada chief after hearing of and reflecting on 
them said, “Anxiety will pass away giving place to delight; but in the end there will be 
sorrow.” (234) 
Bharata knew every word of his servant (Guha) to be true; and proceeding 
further he drew near to the hermitage. When he saw the forest and the mountain range, 
he was as glad as a hungry man on getting excellent food. Just as a people tormented 
by the fear of calamities* and afflicted by threefold troubles as well as by the influence 
of evil stars and by pestilence feel happy on migrating to a well-governed and 
prosperous country, Bharata too had similar feelings. The natural wealth of the forest 
grew while Sri Rama lived there, even as the people rejoice on securing a good king. The 
charming forest was the sacred realm referred to here; Discretion was the king (who 
ruled over it), while Dispassion was his counsellor. Likewise the five Yamasf and the 

* Public calamities or visitations of God (Itis as they are technically called) are reckoned as six in 
number, viz., excessive rain, drought, rats, locusts, parrots and invasion by some neighbouring king. 

t The five forms of self-restraint or Yamas as they are called in Yoga Philosophy are: Ahirhsa (non- 
violence in thought, word and deed), Satya (truthfulness), Brahmacarya (abstinence from sexual indulgence 
in every form), Aparigraha (depriving oneself of all possessions) and Asteya (non-stealing). 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
579 
five Niyamas* constituted the champions of the realm, Mount Citrakuta stood for its 
capital, while Peace and Good Understanding represented the virtuous and lovely 
queens. In this way the good king was complete in all the limbsf of a good state; and 
depending as he did on Sri Rama’s feet his heart was full of zeal. (1 — 4) 
Having conquered King Delusion with all his host King Discretion held undisputed 
sway in his capital; and joy, prosperity and plenty reigned everywhere. (235) 
The numerous hermits’ habitations in the forest region were like so many towns cities, 
villages and hamlets (comprising the king’s dominion). The many birds of various colours 
and the beasts of different varieties constituted his countless subjects. The hares, elephants, 
lions, tigers, boars, buffaloes and bulls presented a sight which attracted admiration. 
Shedding their natural animosities they roamed about together like an army complete in all 
its four limbs. Rills of water flowed and mad elephants trumpeted; their noise resembled 
the beating of kettledrums of various kinds, cakravakas, Cakoras, Catakas, parrots and 
cuckcos and swans made delightful and merry concert. Swarms of bees hummed and 
peacocks danced, which showed as itwere that there was universal rejoicing in that prosperous 
kingdom. Creepers, trees and blades of grass alike were blossoming and bore fruit; the 
entire community thus wore a festive and delightful appearance. (1 — 4) 


* The five Niyamas or religious observances are: Sauca (external and internal purity), Santosa 
(contentment), Tapas (religious austerity). Swadhyaya (study and recitation of the Vedas and muttering or the 
chanting of the Divine Name) and Iswara-Pranidhana (self-surrender to and meditation on God). 

t Every good state must have the following seven limbs : — a sovereign, a minister, allies, a treasury, 
a principality or dominion, a fortress and an army. 

580 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 81
Beholding the beauty of Sri Rama’s hill (Citrakuta) Bharata’s heart overflowed with 
love even as an ascetic who has reaped the fruit of his penance rejoices on the 
completion of his vow. (236) 
In the meantime the Nisada chief ran and climbed up an eminence, and lifting his 
arm, exclaimed to Bharata; “My lord, look at those huge and noble trees of Pakara (the 
citron-leaved Indian fig tree), Jambu (the black plum), Mango and Tamala, in the midst 
of which stands out a beautiful and stately banyan, which is so charming to behold with 
its dark and dense foliage, red fruit and unbroken shade, which is pleasant throughout 
the year, as if God had brought together all that was exquisitely beautiful and given it 
the shape of a dark and rosy mass. The trees in question, my lord, stand close to the 
riverside where the Chief of Raghus has erected His hut of leaves. In front of it you 
will find a variety of charming basil shrubs planted here by Sita and there by 
Laksmana. And in the shade of the banyan tree there is a lovely altar raised by Sita 
with Her own lotus hands — (1 — 4) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
581 
—Seated whereon the all-wise STta and Rama listen everyday, in the midst of a crowd 
of hermits, to all kinds of stories and legends from the Agamas (Tantras), Vedas and Puranas.” 
(237) 


The moment Bharata heard the words of his friend (Guha) and saw the trees 
tears, rushed to his eyes. The two brothers (Bharata and Satrughna) made obeisance 
as they proceeded; even Sarada (the goddess of speech) felt diffident in describing 
their love (for Sri Rama). They were as delighted to behold Sri Rama’s footprints as 
a pauper who had stumbled on a philosopher’s stone. Placing the dust on their head 
and heart they applied it to their eyes and experienced the same degree of joy as they 
would on seeing the Chief of Raghus Himself. Perceiving Bharata’s condition, which 
was altogether beyond description, beasts and birds and even inanimate creatures 
(such as trees etc.,) were overwhelmed with emotion. Overpowered by love Bharata’s 
friend (Guha) lost his way; but the gods showed it to him and rained flowers. God- 
realized saints as well as striving souls were filled with love at his very sight and began 
to praise his natural affection. If Bharata had not been born on this globe (or if the earth 
had not witnessed his love) it would not have been possible to turn inanimate into 
animate and animate into inanimate beings. (1 — 4) 


582 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 82
For the sake of gods in the form of saints the all-compassionate Hero of Raghu’s 
line extracted this nectar of love by churning the unfathomable depths of Bharata’s soul; 
and it was separation from Him which stood for Mount Mandara (that served as a 
churning-stick).* (238) 
The two charming brothers and their friend (Guha) could not be seen by 
Laksmana, screened as they were by a dense thicket. Bharata, however, saw the holy 
and lovely hermitage of his lord, which was an abode of all fair blessings. Even as he 
entered it his woe and affliction disappeared; it seemed as though a Yogi (mystic) had 
realized the supreme truth. Bharata saw Laksmana standing before the Lord and 
affectionately answering His queries. He wore matted hair on his head and had a hermit’s 
robe girt about his loins. Besides there was a quiver fastened to his waist and he bore 
an arrow in his hand and a bow slung across his shoulder. On the altar in the midst of 
an assembly of hermits and holy men shone Sita and the Lord of Raghus, who was clad 
in the bark of trees and had matted hair on His head and a swarthy complexion; it 
seemed as though Rati and the god of love had appeared there in hermit’s garb. He was 
revolving His bow and arrow between His lotus hands and would dispel by one smiling 
glance the anguish of one’s soul. (1 — 4) 

In the midst of a charming ring of hermits Sita and the Moon of Raghu’s race 
shone forth like Devotion and the Supreme Spirit (who is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss 
combined) incarnated as it were in a circle of wisdom. (239) 

* The metaphor has been taken from the Pauranika story of Amrta-Manthana. 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


583 
Bharata as well as his younger brother (Satrughna) and friend (Guha) were so 
enraptured that their joy and sorrow, pleasure and pain, were all forgotten. Uttering the 
words “Protect me, my lord; save me, my master” he fell flat on the ground like a log, 
Laksmana recognized his loving speech and concluded in his mind that it was Bharata 
making obeisance.* On the one hand there was the loving affection of an elder brother 
(Bharata), while, on the other, there was the stronger claim of service to his master. He 
was, therefore, neither able to meet his brother (Bharata) nor ignore him; some good poet 
alone could describe Laksmana’s state of mind. He threw his whole weight on the side 
of service and remained where he was, even as a kite-flier would pull against a kite that 
has risen high in the air. Bowing his head to the ground he lovingly said, “Bharata is 
making obeisance to you, O Lord of Raghus.” Overwhelmed with emotion Sri Rama 
started up as soon as He heard this, His cloth fell somewhere and His quiver, bow and 
arrows at other places. (1 — 4) 
The all-compassionate Lord forcibly lifted Bharata and clasped him to His 
bosom. Everyone who witnessed the meeting of Bharata and Sri Rama lost all self- 
consciousness. (240) 
* Since Bharata had fallen prostrate behind his back Laksmana, who was loth to divert his mind from 
Sri Rama’s service, could not see him; hence he could only infer his identity from his voice. 




584 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 83
How can the affectionate meeting be described ? It was unapproachable to the 
poet in thought, word and deed alike. The two brothers overflowed with supreme 
affection; their mind, reason, intellect and ego were all lost. Tell me, who can portray 
such noble love ? By what shadow will the poet’s mind seek to attain to it ? The poet 
has its power in word and meaning; a dancer regulates his movements according to 
the cadence of the accompanying music. Unapproachable is the affection of Bharata and 
the Chief of Raghu’s line, which is beyond the conception of Brahma (the Creator), Hari 
(the Protector) and Hara (the Destroyer of the universe). How, then, can I describe it, 
dull-witted as I am ? Can an instrument strung with a chord made of a species of grass 
known by the name of Gidara produce good music ? When the gods witnessed 
the meeting of Bharata and the Chief of Raghu’s line they were alarmed and their 
heart began to palpitate. The dull fellows were disillusioned only when their preceptor 
(the sage Bfhaspati) admonished them; and now they rained flowers and gave shouts 
of applause. (1 — 4) 
After fondly embracing Ripusudana (Satrughna) Sri Rama met the Nisada chief. Even 
so with profuse love Bharata embraced Laksmana while the latter was greeting him. (241) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


585 

Likewise Laksmana eagerly met his younger brother (Satrughna) and next clasped 
the Nisada chief to his bosom. Then the two brothers (Bharata and Satrughna) greeted 
the host of hermits and were delighted to receive blessings to their liking. In a rapture 
of love Bharata and his younger brother (Satrughna) placed on their head the dust of Sita’s 
lotus-feet and made obeisance to Her again and again; while She lifted them each time 
and stroking their head with Her lotus hand made them sit down. Slta blessed them in 
Her heart; She was so overwhelmed with love that She lost all consciousness of Her body. 
When they found Slta propitious in everyway, they became free from anxiety and the 
imaginary fears of their heart were gone. No one uttered a word nor asked any question; 
the mind was so full of love that it had stopped its activity. Presently the Nisada chief 
collected himself and bowing his head submitted with joined palms: (1 — 4) 
 “Stricken with grief due to separation from you, my lord, all your mothers, the 
people of the city, servants, generals and ministers, all have come alongwith the lord of 
sages, Vasistha.” (242) 
586 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
When the Ocean of amiability, Sri Rama, learnt that His preceptor had come, 
He left Ripudamana (Satrughna) by Sita’s side and the All-merciful proceeded at once 
with quick steps, a champion of virtue and self-possessed that He was. On seeing 
the Guru both the Lord and His younger brother (Laksmana) were overwhelmed with 
affection and prostrated themselves on the ground. The chief of sages, however, 
ran and clasped them to his bosom; he received them with a heart overflowing 
with love. Thrilling all over with emotion and mentioning his name the Nisada 
chief too fell prostrate on the ground at a respectable distance. The sage, however, 
forcibly embraced him as a friend of Sri Rama; it seemed as though he had lifted 
up the love in person on the ground. “Devotion to the Lord of Raghus is the root 
of all choice blessings!” With these words of praise the gods in heaven rained 
flowers. “There is no one so utterly vile as this man; and who is so great as Vasistha 
in this world?” (1 — 4) 
 “Yet on seeing him the king of sages embraced him with greater joy than he did 
Laksmana. Such is the palpable glory and effect of adoring Sita’s lord!” (243) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
587 


Sri Rama, the all-compassionate and all-wise Lord, found all the people 
restless; and therefore, meeting the wish of everyone according to the sentiment 
each cherished in his heart. He and His younger brother met them all in an instant 
and relieved their distress and terrible agony. This was no great achievement for 
Sri Rama; the sun would as well cast its reflection in millions of jars (full of water) 
simultaneously. All the citizens met the Nisada chief with a heart overflowing with 
love and praised his good fortune. Sri Rama found all His mothers as stricken with 
grief as a row of tender creepers that had been smitten by frost. First of all He 
met Kaikeyi, and softened her mind by His guileless disposition and devotion. He 
fell at her feet and then soothed her attributing the blame to the wheel of time, 
destiny and Providence. (1 — 4) 
The Chief of Raghu’s line thereafter met all His mothers and consoled them by 
exhorting them in the following words: “Mother, the world is controlled by the will of God; 
no one should, therefore, be blamed.” (244) 

The two brothers (Sri Rama and Laksmana) then adored the feet of their preceptor’s 
wife (Arundhati) as well as of all those Brahmana ladies who had accompanied her, 
paying them all the same honour as is due to the holy Gariga and Goddess Gauri (Siva’s 
Consort); while the ladies gladly blessed them in soft accents. After clasping Sumitra’s 
feet they sought her lap even as an abject pauper would hug a treasure. Both the 
brothers now fell at the feet of mother Kausalya, all their limbs overwrought by love. The 
mother most fondly clasped them to her bosom and bathed them with tears of affection. 
588 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 84
How can any poet describe the joy and grief of the occasion any more than a dumb man 
the taste of what he has eaten. After meeting their mother the Lord of Raghus and His 
younger brother (Laksmana) requested their Guru to accompany them. And on receiving 
the sage’s command the citizens encamped themselves wherever they saw a suitable site 
and water close by. (1 — 4) 
Taking with them a few chosen people, viz., the Brahmanas, the ministers, the 
queen-mothers and the preceptor, Bharata, Laksmana and the Lord of Raghus proceeded 
to the holy hermitage. (245) 
Sita came and threw herself at the feet of Vasistha (the chief of sages) and received 
suitable blessings solicited by Her mind. The affectionate manner in which She met the 
Guru’s wife (Arundhati) and the wives of other hermits was beyond description. Adoring the 
feet of all one by one Sita received blessings dear to Her heart. When Sita saw all Her 
mothers-in-law the tender Sita closed Her eyes and she shrank They appeared to Her like 
so many female swans fallen into the hands of some fowler. “ What has a mischievous 
Providence done !” She said to Herself. They too were sore distressed when they gazed on 
Sita. “We must bear all that Fate imposes on us,” they thought. Janaka’s Daughter then took 
courage in Her heart and with Her dark lotus-eyes filled with tears She approached and 
embraced all Her mothers-in-law. Earth was enveloped in pathos at the moment. (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
589 

Throwing Herself at the feet of all severlly Slta greeted them with utmost love. 
Overwhelmed with emotion they blessed Her in their heart, “May you continue to enjoy a happy 
wifehood !” (246) 
Finding Slta and all the queen-mothers shaken with emotion the wise Guru bade 
them all sit down. Declaring the nature of the world to be illusory the lord of sages gave 
them some discourse on spiritual matters. He then announced the king’s departure to 
heaven and the Lord of Raghus was deeply pained to hear of it. Thinking the king had 
died on account of love for Him the firmest of the firm was much agitated. Hearing the 
unpalatable news, which was cruel as the thunderbolt Laksmana, STta and all the queens 
broke out into lamentations. Nay, the whole assembly was sore stricken with grief as 
though the king had died that very day. The chief of sages then comforted Sr! Rama, 
who with all those present there bathed in the sacred stream. The Lord fasted that day 
abstaining even from water. And even though persuaded by the sage none else took a drop 
of water either. (1 — 4) 

At daybreak the Lord reverently and devoutly did all that the sage bade the 
Delighter of Raghus do. (247) 


590 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 85
Having performed His father’s obsequies as prescribed in the Vedas the Lord, 
who was a sun as it were, to the darkness of sins, became pure again. The Lord whose 
Name Itself is a fire to the cotton of sins and whose very thought is the root of all choice 
blessings, attained purity even as the heavenly stream is consecrated by invoking into it 
other sacred waters:* such is the verdict of holy men. When two days elapsed after the 
purification, Sri Rama affectionately said to the Guru: “My lord, all the people are sore 
distressed, living as they do on bulbs, roots, fruits and water alone. When I behold 
Bharata and his younger brother (Satrughna), the ministers and all my mothers, every 
minute that passes seems an age to me. Therefore, pray return to the city with all; 
for you are here and the king (my father) is in heaven (there is no one to look after the 
city). I have said too much and all this amounts to gross presumption on my part. Now, 
my lord, do what is proper.” (1 — 4) 
 “It is no wonder, Rama, that you should speak like this, a bulwark of righteousness 
and a home of compassion that you are. But grieved as the people are, let them derive 
solace by enjoying your sight for a couple of days.” (248) 

* The Gariga, which is pure in itself, is consecrated only in name by invoking other sacred waters into 
it; on the other hand, it lends purity to the waters that are invoked into it. Even so the Lord, who is all-pure, 
attained purity in the eyes of the world by performing certain religious rites; while, as a matter of fact, the rites 
themselves were consecrated from the time they were performed by the Lord. 


AYODHYA-KANDA 


591 
At the words of Sri Rama the assembly trembled with fear like a ship tossed on 
the ocean. When, however, they heard the auspicious words of the Guru, it seemed as 
though the wind had turned in their favour. Thrice in the day (in the morning, at noon and 
in the evening) they bathed in the holy Payasvini river, the very sight of which wipes out 
hosts of sins, ever feasting their eyes on Sri Rama, the incarnation of blessedness, and 
gladly prostrating themselves before Him again and again. They went out to see the hill and 
woods hallowed by the presence of Sri Rama, where reigned joy of every kind and which 
was free from all sorrows. Water sweet as nectar flowed from springs; while soft, cool 
and fragrant breezes soothed every pain of mind and body. Trees, creepers and grasses 
of infinite variety; fruits, flowers and leaves of many kinds; beautiful slabs of stone and 
the delightful shade of trees: the splendour of the forest was beyond description. (1 — 4) 
Lotuses adorned the lakes, waterfowls cooed and bees hummed; while birds and 
beasts of various colours roamed about in the forest free from animosities. (249) 

592 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

The Koals, Kiratas, Bhilas and other dwellers of the forest prepared lovely bowls 
of leaves and filling them with honey, pure, fine and delicious as nectar, presented 
them with small bundles of bulbs, roots, fruits and sprouts to all the newcomers with 
humble submission and salutations, severally mentioning the taste, species, virtue 
and name of each. The people offered a liberal price; but the foresters would not 
accept it and returned it adjuring them by Sri Rama’s love to take it back. 
Overwhelmed with emotion they submitted in gentle tones: “The good people respect 
true love once they have come to recognize it. You are all virtuous souls, while we 
are vile Nisadas: it is through Rama’s grace that we have been blessed with your 
sight. You were utterly inaccessible to us even as the stream of the heavenly river 
(Gariga) is to the desert land of Maru (Western Rajaputana and Sindha). The all-merciful 
Rama has showered his grace on the Nisada chief; a king’s kith and kin and subjects 
too should share his disposition. (1 — 4) 
“Bearing this in mind shake off all scruple and recognizing our affection show 
your grace to us. And in order to oblige us do accept fruits, grass and shoots 
from us.” (250) 

593 


“You have come to this forest as our welcome guests; but we are not lucky enough 
to be fit for rendering service to you. What can we offer you noble sirs ? Fuel and leaves 
are the only tokens of a Kirata’s friendship; and our greatest service is that we do not 
steal and remove your utensils and clothes. We are uncultured creatures taking others’ 
life, and are crooked by nature, wicked, evil-minded and low-born. Our days and nights 
are spent in sinful pursuits and yet we have no cloth to cover our loins and get no food 
enough to fill our belly. How could we possibly have ever dreamt of entertaining pious 
sentiments but for the virtue of having seen the Delighter of Raghus ? Ever since we had 
the good fortune of gazing on our Lord’s lotus feet our terrible woes and evils have 
disappeared.” The citizens were overwhelmed with emotion to hear these words and 
began to extol the good fortune of those foresters. (1 — 4) 
All began to extol the good fortune of the foresters and addressed them in terms 
of endearment. Everyone rejoiced to hear their talk and behold their polite manners as 
well as their devotion to the feet of Sita and Rama. Men and women deprecated their own 
love when they heard the talk of the Kolas and Bhilas. It was through the grace of Sri 
Rama (the Jewel of Raghu’s line), says Tulasidasa, that a block of iron floated with a 
boat loaded on it.* 
* Evidently the people of Ayodhya, who were all deeply attached to Sri Rama and were highly virtuous 
souls, are here likened to a boat inasmuch as they were fit to carry any number of people through the ocean 
of metempsychosis to the feet of SrT Rama by their devotion. The Kolas and Bhilas, on the other hand, who 
represented the lowest strata of society and were low by birth as well as by conduct, are compared to a block 
of iron which cannot even float, much less carry any other weight on it. Through the grace of Sri Rama, 
however, the foresters put to shame the people of Ayodhya by their artless devotion to Rama and hence the 
metaphorical statement that a block of iron floated with a boat placed on it. 




594 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 86
The men and women of the city remained deeply immersed in love; days passed 
like a moment to them. Sita, assuming as many forms as She had mothers-in-law, waited 
on each with equal attention. No one but Rama knew the mystery behind it; for all 
delusive potencies form part of Sita’s delusive power. Sita won over the queen-mothers 
by Her services, gratified by which they instructed and blessed Her. Perceiving the two 
brothers as well as Sita Straight in their dealings, the wicked queen bitterly repented. 
Kaikeyi sought help both from Earth and the god of death; but neither Earth afforded her 
shelter in her womb nor did God grant her death. It is well-known by popular tradition as 
well as through the Vedas, and the Sages too declare, that those who are hostile to 
Rama find no resting-place even in hell. The question that stirred every mind now was; 
“Good heavens, will Rama return to Ayodhya or not ?” (1 — 4) 
Bharata had no sleep by night nor appetite by day, perturbed as he was by a pious 
anxiety, even as a fish sunk in a shallow marsh is worried by paucity of water. (252) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


595 


“Disguised as my mother it was Fate that wrought this mischief, even as a crop 
of paddy ripening for the harvest may be visited by some pest. How can Sri Rama’s 
coronation be accomplished ? I can hit upon no device to secure this. He would certainly 
return in obedience to the Guru’s commands; but the sage will ask Sri Rama to return 
only when he knows that the latter will like it. The Lord of Raghus would return even 
at the bidding of his mother; but will Sri Rama’s mother ever insist on it? As for myself, 
I am only his vassal and as such count for nothing. On top of it I have fallen on 
evil days and Providence is against me. If I assert my own will, it would be a grievous 
sin; for the duty of a servant is more arduous than the lifting of Mount Kailasa (Siva’s 
own Abode).” Bharata could not decide upon anyone device and he spent the whole 
night in speculation. At daybreak he bathed, bowed his head to the Lord and was 
going to sit down beside Him when he was sent for by the sage (Vasistha). (1 — 
4 ) 




596 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 87
The chief of the sages, Vasistha, spoke in words appropriate to the occasion 
“Listen, O councillors, and you, wise Bharata; the sun of the solar race, King Rama, is 
a champion of righteousness and the almighty Lord dependent on none but Himself. Sri 
Rama is true to His word and maintains the standard of morality set up by the Vedas; 
His very advent is a source of blessing to the world. Obedient to the commands of His 
preceptor and parents, He crushes the armies of the wicked and is a friend of the gods. 
Propriety of behaviour, love, the highest object of life and worldly interests — no one 
knows these aright as Rama does. Brahma (the Creator), Hari (the Preserver) and Hara 
(the Destroyer of the universe), the moon-god, the sun-god and the guardians of the 
various quarters, Maya (the deluding potency of God), Jiva (the individual soul), the 
various forms of Karma (the residue of actions) and the Time-Spirit, Sesa (the lord of 
serpents), the rulers of the earth and whatever other powers there are and even so the 
accomplishments of Yoga extolled in the Vedas and other scriptures — ponder in your 
heart and consider well — Sri Rama’s commands exercise their authority over all.”(1 — 4) 
 “If we carry out Sri Rama’s orders and respect His wishes, it will be well for us 
all. Ponder this, O wise men; and do that which you all unanimously resolve upon.” (254) 


“Sri Rama’s coronation will be delightful to all; that is the only course which is 
conducive to good luck and joy. In what way can the Lord of Raghus be prevailed upon to 
return to Ayodhya; ponder this and tell me, so that we may adopt the same device.” Everyone 
listened with reverence to the sage’s speech, surcharged as it was, with prudence and 
spiritual wisdom and salutary from the worldly point of view as well. But no answer was 
forthcoming: the people were dumbfounded. Then Bharata bowed his head and with joined 
palms began as follows: ‘The solar race has produced many a king each one far greater than 
the rest. For the birth of all, the father and mother are responsible; whereas it is God who 
dispenses the good or evil fruit of their actions. Your benediction, as all the world knows, 
wipes out sorrow and confers all blessings. As for yourself, my lord, you thwarted the course 
of Providence*; no one can alter what you have resolved upon.” (1 — 4) 
* A few instances are quoted below to prove the truth of this statement: — 

(1) King Dasaratha had no male issue. As a result of Vasistha’s benediction he was blessed with four 
sons at the age of 60,000 years. 

(2) The seventh Manu, Vaivasvata, had no son. The sage Vasistha caused a sacrifice to be performed 
by him. Manu’s consort, Sraddha, wished to have a daughter and accordingly requested the sacrificial priest 
(Hota) to get her a daughter. The priest offered oblations with that motive and as a result of this a daughter, 
lla by name, was born to Sraddha. Vaivasvata was taken aback to hear of this change and approached the sage 
with his grievance. Vasistha, who came to know the cause through meditation, consoled the Manu and assured 
him that he would fulfil his desire by dint of his penance. He prayed to the Lord and propitiated Him and secured 
a blessing from Him to the effect that the king’s daughter would be transformed into a son. lla was accordingly 
changed into Sudyumna. One day, Sudyumna, who was now grown up into full manhood and was out for 
hunting, entered the precincts of a pleasure-grove at the foot of Mount Sumeru, reserved for Bhagavan Siva 
and Goddess ParvatT, and was retransformed into a woman under a standing curse pronounced by Siva that 
any male who entered the grove would be changed into a woman. The moon-god’s son, Budha, who had been 
practising austerity in the vicinity of that grove fell in love with the woman and she too was attracted towards 
him. The pair accordingly lived together as husband and wife. One day the princess invoked Vasistha, who 
appeared before her and was moved with pity to see her plight. He prayed to Lord Siva and secured from him 
a boon to the effect that the prince would change his sex every month. He thus lived with Budha as his wife for 
one month and ruled over his kingdom as Sudyumna during another by rotation. 

(3) Vasistha, who was a mind-born son of Brahma, was called upon by his father to assume the role of 
a family priest in relation to the Kings of the solar race. Finding him reluctant to accept this position, which was 
rather humiliating. Brahma tried to persuade him by the argument that the Lord Himself would appear in that line 
in the Tretayuga and that he would automatically secure the enviable position of the Lord’s own family priest and 
preceptor and live on most intimate terms with Him. According to the order of sequence originally determined, 
Dvapara (literally, the second Yuga) was to follow Satyayuga and T reta (literally, the third Yuga) was to come next. 
Vasistha, however, was too impatient to wait for a couple of Yugas and accordingly changed their order of 
sequence. It was under His dispensation that Treta followed Satyayuga and Dvapara succeeded Treta. 

(4) The sage Visvamitra, who originally belonged to the Ksatriya caste, practised austere penance for 
thousands of years with a view to attaining Brahmanhood. At last Brahma recognized his claims to Brahmanhood 
and called him a Brahmarsi (a Brahmana sage). But Visvamitra would not be satisfied until Vasistha accepted 
him as such In this way he attached a greater weight to Vasistha’s opinion. Vasistha however, declined to accept 
him as a Brahmarsi till he retained even a tinge of egotism. He addressed him as a Brahmarsi only when he was 
satisfied that Visvamitra had been purged of the last traces of egotism. Others, however, maintain that Vasistha 
did not recognize his claims to Brahmanhood till the last. 

(5) During the nuptials of King Dillpa and Sudaksina the ends of the garments of the bride and bridegroom 
were tied together most tightly. When Vasistha enquired the reason he was told that the pair would die the moment 
their knot was untied. The sage thereupon altered the course of destiny and averted their death. 

598 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 87
“And yet you ask advice of me at this juncture ! All this is my misfortune.” The 
Guru’s heart overflowed with love when he heard these affectionate words. (255) 


“What you have said is no doubt true, my child; but it is all due to Sri Rama’s grace. 
He who is hostile to Rama can never dream of success. I hesitate to tell you one thing; 
the wise forgo one-half when they find the whole in peril. You two brothers (6atrughna and 
yourself) retire to the woods; while Laksmana, Sita and the Lord of Raghus may be sent 
back.” The two brothers (Bharata and Satrughna) rejoiced to hear these agreeable 
words; their whole frame was filled with excess of joy. They were pleased at heart and 
a glow irradiated their body as though King Dasaratha had come to life again and Rama 
had been crowned king. The people thought they would gain much while their loss would 
be comparatively small. The queen-mothers, however, all wept because their joy and 
sorrow matched each other. “By obeying the Guru’s commands,” Bharata observed, 
“One would attain the fruit of gratifying all the creatures of the world. I will stay all my life 
in the forest; I conceive no greater happiness than this.” (1 — 4) 
 “Rama and Sita have access to all hearts, while you are omniscient and wise. If 
what you say is true, then inplement your word, my lord.” (256) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


599 

Hearing Bharata’s words and seeing his love, the sage as well as the whole 
assembly were transported out of themselves-Bharata’s transcendent glory resembled 
the ocean and the sage’s wit stood on its brink like a helpless woman who longed 
to cross it and sought many a device but was unable to find a boat, ship or raft. Who 
else, then, can glorify Bharata ? Can the ocean be contained in the shell of a small 
pool ? The sage was pleased with Bharata in his heart of hearts; with the whole 
assembly, therefore, he came to Sri Rama. The Lord made obeisance and offered him 
a seat of honour; and receiving the sage’s permission all sat down. The great sage 
then spoke in well-considered phrases appropriate to the time, place and circumstances: 
“Listen, Rama; you are omniscient and wise and a storehouse of piety, prudence, 
virtue and knowledge. (1 — 4) 
 “You dwell in the heart of all and know our good and evil intentions. Tell us, 
therefore, the way in which the citizens, your mothers and Bharata too may be 
benefited.” (257) 

600 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 88
 “The afflicted never speak with forethought. A gambler sees his own game.” On 
hearing the sage’s words the Lord of Raghus replied, “My lord, the remedy lies in your 
own hands. Everyone will be benefited by meeting your wishes, carrying out your 
behests and gladly acclaiming them. In the first place, whatever orders and instructions 
are given to me I will reverently carry them out. Then, my lord, whoever receives any 
order from you will fully devote himself to your service.” Said the sage, “What you have 
said, Rama, is true; but Bharata’s love has robbed me of my wits. That is why I say again 
and again, my judgment has been enthralled by Bharata’s devotion. To my mind, Siva 
be my witness, whatever you do with due deference to Bharata’s wishes will be all for 
good.” (1—4) 

 “Listen with attention to Bharata’s humble submission and then think over it. Again, 
sifting the worldly point of view and the conclusions of holy men as well as of the political 
etheis and the Vedas do what they enjoin upon you.” (258) 
bharatu kahahr soi kie bhalal 
Sri Rama was particularly delighted £ 
: heart to see the Guru’s affection for Bharata. 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


601 


Knowing Bharata to be a champion of virtue and His servant in thought, word and deed, 
He spoke words that were sweet, soft and delightful and harmonized with the Guru’s 
commands: “My lord, I swear by you as well as by the feet of my father that in the whole 
world there has been no brother like Bharata. Those who are devoted to the lotusfeet of 
their preceptor are highly blessed from the point of view of the world as well as of the 
Vedas. And who can extol Bharata’s good fortune, for whom you cherish such love ! 
Knowing him to be a younger brother my mind recoils when I proceed to praise him to his 
face. Of course it will be conducive to our good to do what he suggests.” Having said so 
Sri Rama kept silent. (1 — 4) 
The sage now said to Bharata, “Shaking off all scruple, my dear child, tell your 
dear brother, who is an ocean of kindness, what is there in your heart.” (259) 



When Bharata heard the sage’s words and came to know what was in Sri Rama’s 
mind, he was satisfied that both the preceptor and the master were exceedingly 
propitious to him. At the same time he realized that the entire responsibility had been 
thrown on his own shoulders. He was, therefore, unable to speak a word and became 
thoughtful. With his body thrilling all over he stood in the assembly and tears of love 
gushed forth from his lotus eyes. “The lord of sages has already said what I had to say. 
Beyond that I have nothing to submit. I know the disposition of my master, who is never 
angry even with the offender. To me he has been particularly kind and affectionate; I 
have never seen him frown even in play. Even from my infancy I never left his company 
and at no time did he damp my spirits. I have realized in my heart the benevolent ways 
of my lord, who would have me win a game even though I had lost it. (1 — 4) 

602 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 89
 “Overcome by affection and modesty I too never opened my lips before him. 
And my eyes, that have been thirsting through love for his sight, have not been sated 
to this day.” (260) 
But Fate could not bear to see me treated with fondness. In the disguise of my vile 
mother God created a cleft between us. It does not behove me today to say even this; 
for who has come to be recognized as good and innocent on the basis of his own 
estimation ? To entertain the thought that my mother is wicked while I am virtuous and 
upright is itself tantamount to a million evil practices. Can an ear of the Kodo* plant yield 
good rice and can a dark bivalve shell produce a pearl ? Not a tinge of blame attaches 
to anyone even in a dream. My ill-luck is unfathomable like the ocean. In vain did I 
torment my mother by taunting her without estimating the consequences of my own sins. 
I have mentally surveyed all possible avenues but feel frustrated. There is only one hope 
of my salvation: Your Holiness is my preceptor while Sita and Rama are my masters. 
From this I presume that all will be well in the end. (1 — 4) 
* The Kodo (Sarhskrta Kodrava) is a kind of corn grown in the eastern parts of U.P. It bears a small 
grain of inferior quality, eaten only by the poor. 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


603 


“In this concourse of holy men, in the presence of my preceptor and master and 
in this holy place I speak in good faith. Whether there is any love in my heart or it is all 
simulation and whether what I say is true or false is known to the sage as well as to the 
Lord of Raghus.” (261) 
 “The whole world will bear witness, on the one hand, to the king having died as a 
result of his uncompromising love, and to my mother’s evil intent, on the other. The queen- 
mothers are in such distress that one cannot bear to look at them; while the men and 
women of the city are burning with deep agony. I have heard and realized that I am the root 
of all trouble and have accordingly endured all suffering. To crown all when I heard that clad 
in hermit’s robes and accompanied by Laksmana and Sita, the Lord of Raghus proceeded 
to the woods on foot and without shoes, God Sankara be my witness, I survived even that 
blow. On top of it, when I witnessed the Nisada’s love, my heart, which is harder than 
adamant, refused to break. And now I have seen all with my own eyes and so long as I live 
my stupid soul will subject me to all kinds of suffering. What shall I say of Rama, Laksmana 
and Sita, at whose sight even snakes and scorpions on the road divested themselves 
their virulent poison and irrepressible anger !” (1 — 4) 
 “On whom else, then, should Providence inflict severe pain if not on the son of 
Kaikeyi, who looked upon these very Rama, Laksmana and Sita as her enemies !” (262) 




604 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 90
On hearing the excellent and most impassioned speech of Bharata, which was full 
of agony and love, humility and prudence, everybody was plunged in sorrow and the 
assembly became sad as if a bed of lotuses was smitten by frost. The enlightened sage 
comforted Bharata by narrating old legends of various kinds; and the Delighter of 
Raghus, who was a veritable moon to the lily-like solar race, spoke words which were 
meet and proper: “You feel humiliated in spirit for nothing, dear brother; know that the 
destiny of souls lies in the hands of God. To my mind, men of holy reputation in all the 
three spheres of creation and belonging to the past, present and future are pygmies 
before you, my darling. He who attributes malevolence to you even in his heart will be 
ruined in this world as well as in the next. As for mother Kaikeyi they alone blame her, 
who have waited neither on the Guru nor on assemblage of holy men.” (1 — 4) 
“With the very invocation of your name all sins and error and all the hosts of evils 
will be obliterated; nay, it will bring in its train fair renown in this world and happiness 
hereafter.” (263) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
605 

“With Lord Siva as my witness I speak the truth in good faith, Bharata: the 
earth is being sustained by you. Pray do not indulge in wrong hypotheses about 
yourself for nothing, my darling; hatred and love cannot be disguised even if one 
tries to conceal them. Birds and beasts draw close to hermits, while they run away 
at the very sight of a hunter who torments them. Even beasts and birds can 
distinguish between a friend and a foe, to say nothing of the human body, which 
is a storehouse of virtue and knowledge. I know you full well, dear brother; but 
what am I to do ? There is great perplexity in my mind. The king (our father), 
you know, kept his word and abandoned me; nay, he gave up his life in order 
to keep his vow of love. I feel perturbed in my mind if I proceed to violate his 
word; and my scruple on your account is even greater. On top of it my preceptor 
has given his command to me. In any case I am prepared to do precisely what 
you suggest.” (1 — 4) 
 “With a cheerful heart and shaking off all scruple tell me what to do; and I will 
accomplish it this very day.” The assembly rejoiced to hear these words of Sri Rama (the 
Chief of Raghu’s line), who was ever true to his word. (264) 


606 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Indra (the king of celestials) and the hosts of other gods trembled with fear and 
felt perturbed at the thought that their whole scheme was going to miscarry. They were 
completely at a loss what to do. At last they mentally approached Sri Rama for 
protection. Again they deliberated with one another and said that the Lord of Raghus 
was under the spell of the devotion of His devotees. Remembering the story of 
Ambarisa and Durvasa the gods as well as their lord (Indra) became utterly despondent. 
In the past too the gods suffered for a long time till at last it was Prahlada who revealed 
Lord Nrsirtiha* Beating their head they whispered into one another’s ear: “The gods’ 
interests now lie in Bharata’s hands. We see no other remedy, O gods; our only hope 
is that Sri Rama acknowledges the services rendered to His noble servants. Do you 
all, therefore, invoke with a loving heart Bharata, who has won over Sri Rama by his 
goodness and amiability.” (1 — 4) 
When the preceptor of the gods (the sage Brhaspati) heard of the gods’ intention, 

he said, “Good ! Your luck is great. Devotion to Bharata’s feet is the root of all choice 

blessings in this world.” (265) 
* So-called because He had taken the form of a man-lion. 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


607 
Chapter 91
 “The service of a devotee of Sita’s lord is as good as a hundred cows of plenty 
(i.e., it fulfils all one’s desires). Now that devotion to Bharata has appealed to your mind 
worry no more; for God has accomplished your object. See Bharata’s greatness O king 
of gods; the Lord of Raghus is completely under his sway as a matter of course. 
Knowing Bharata to be Sri Rama’s shadow, make your mind easy. O gods; there is no 
cause for fear.” The Lord, who has access to all hearts, felt uncomfortable when He 
came to know of the conference between the gods and their preceptor (the sage 
Brhaspati) and of the anxiety of the former. Bharata now felt in his heart that the whole 
responsibility rested on his shoulders; he, therefore, entertained in his mind propositions 
of innumerable kinds. After much deliberation he came to the conclusion that his welfare 
consisted in obeying Sri Rama. “He has kept my vow, relinquishing his own, and has 
thereby shown not a little kindness and love.” (1 — 4) 
 “Sita’s lord has done me a great and unbounded favour in everyway.” Then, 
bowing his head and joining his lotus hands, Bharata said: — (266) 
 “What shall I say or put into other’s mouth, my lord, an ocean of compassion 
and the knower of all hearts that you are? Now that my Guru is pleased and my master 




608 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


(yourself) propitious, the torment, which was the creation of my foul mind is over. I 
was obsessed with imaginary fears and my anxiety had no foundation whatsoever. 
It is no fault of the sun if anyone mistakes the quarters. My own ill-luck, my mother’s 
perversity, the odd ways of Providence and the cruelty of fate, all conspired with the 
avowed object of ruining me; but you came to my rescue by redeeming your vow 
(of protecting your devotees), a protector of the suppliant that you are. This is, however, 
no novel procedure for you; it is well-known to the world as well as to the Vedas 
and is an open secret. If the whole world is hostile and you alone are kindly disposed, 
my lord, tell me through whose goodness if not through yours, can one’s good be 
accomplished? My lord, you are of the same disposition as the tree of paradise: it 
is neither for nor against anyone.” (1 — 4) 
 “Should anyone approach the tree of paradise recognizing it as such, its very 
shade relieves all anxiety. And everyone in this world obtains the desired object on the 
mere asking, be he a prince or pauper, good or bad.” (267) 


Chapter 92
 “Since I have found my Guru and my master (yourself) affectionate to me in 
everyway, my unrest has gone and I have no doubt left in my mind. Now, O mine of 
compassion, take steps to see that you do not feel perturbed for the sake of your 
servant. A servant who seeks his own gain by placing his master in an embarrassing 
situation is a mean-minded fellow. A servant will gain only if he serves his master 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
609 
renouncing all his personal comforts and greed. If, my lord, you return to Ayodhya, 
everyone will be a gainer. And if we obey your orders, we shall gain in millions of ways. 
Obedience to you constitutes the highest gain both materially and spiritually; nay, it is the 
consummation of all meritorious acts and the ornament of all good destinies. My lord, 
listen to a request of mine and then do as you deem fit. I have brought with me, duly 
arranged, all the requisites for the coronation ceremony. Kindly have it brought into use, 
my lord, if it so pleases you.” (1 — 4) 
 “Send me into exile with my younger brother (Satrughna) and let everybody feel 
secure under your protection. Or else, send back both the younger brothers (Laksmana 
and Satrughna) and let me accompany you, my lord.” (268) 

 “Or (as a third alternative) we three brothers may remain in the forest, while Sita 
and yourself may return to Ayodhya. Do that, O ocean of mercy, which may please your 
heart, my lord. You have thrown the whole burden on me, my master; but I have no 
ethical insight nor any idea of religion. I am actuated by self-interest in whatever I say; 
a man in distress loses his senses. Shame herself would be ashamed to look at a 
servant who evades compliance with an order given by his master. Even though I am 
such an unfathomable ocean of faults, my master (yourself) out of affection for me 
praises me as a noble soul. Now, O merciful one, I will submit to that proposition which 
will spare my lord an awkward situation. Swearing by my lord’s feet I tell you in good faith 
that this is the only way to ensure the happiness of the world.” (1 — 4) 

610 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “Each one of us will reverently carry out the orders that the Lord may be pleased 
to give with a cheerful heart and without reserve; and all injustice and imbroglio 
will end.” (269) 
The gods rejoiced to hear Bharata’s guileless speech; and acclaiming him 
in the words “Well done!” they rained down flowers. The people of Ayodhya felt 
much puzzled, while the ascetics and the foresters were greatly delighted. The 
Lord of Raghus, who was very considerate by nature, kept mum; and observing His 
silence the whole assembly felt perturbed. That very moment messengers from King 
Janaka arrived. When the sage Vasistha heard of it he sent for them promptly. After 
making obeisance they looked at Sri Rama and were much grieved to behold His 
attire (which resembled that of a hermit). The chief of sages, Vasistha, made enquires 
from the messengers: “Tell me if all is well with King Videha (Janaka).” The noble 
messengers felt abashed to hear this. They bowed their head to the ground and replied 
with joined palms: “Your loving enquiry itself, O lord, has proved conducive to our 
good, holy sir.” (1 — 4) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


611 


“Otherwise our welfare, O lord, passed away with the king of Kosala, whose death 
has left the whole world, particularly Mithila (Janaka’s capital) and Ayodhya, masterless.” 
(270) 
On hearing of the demise of King Dasaratha (the lord of Ayodhya) the people of 
Janakapura were all mad with grief. No one who saw King Videha at that time took his 
name (Videha) to have any truth behind it. When the king heard of Queen Kaikeyi’s 
wickedness, he was as nonplussed as a serpent without its gem. Prince Bharata 
crowned king and the Chief of Raghus, Sri Rama, exiled into the woods! The news 
caused deep agony to the heart of Mithila’s lord! The king called together a council of 
wise men and ministers and said, “Tell me after careful deliberation what ought to be done 
now.” But realizing the conditions at Ayodhya and the difficulty in either case nobody 
gave any definite opinion whether he should go or stay at home. The king now collected 
himself and after calm reflection despatched four clever spies to Ayodhya with the 
following instructions: ‘Ascertain whether Bharata means well or ill and come back at 
once without being recognized.’ (1 — 4) 
The spies went to Ayodhya and having ascertained Bharata’s ways and seen 
his doings they proceeded back to Tirahuta (Mithila) the moment the latter left for 
Citrakuta. (271) 


612 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 93
“The spies on their arrival gave an account in Janaka’s court of Bharata’s doings 
as best as they could. The Guru (the sage Satananda), the members of the royal family, 
the ministers and the king himself were all overpowered with grief and affection at the 
report. Then, collecting himself and gloryfying Bharata, the king summoned his chosen 
warriors and equerries and, posting guards at the palaces, city and realm got ready a 
number of horses, elephants, chariots and other conveyances. After ascertaining as 
auspio of forty eight minutes* he started at once and did not halt on the way. Having 
bathed at Prayaga this very morning, he has already left the place; and when the whole 
party began to cross the Yamuna, they despatched us ahead for obtaining news, holy sir.” 
So saying they bowed their head to the ground. The great sage Vasistha dismissed the 
messengers at once, sending with them an escort of six or seven Kiratas. (1 — 4) 
The people of Ayodhya were all delighted to hear of Janaka’s arrival, Sri Rama, 
the Delighter of Raghus, felt very uncomfortable; while Indra, the king of celestials, was 
particularly overwhelmed with anxiety. (272) 
* There is a universal belief among the Hindus in the occult influence of stars upon human affairs 
and in his day-to-day life a Hindu is guided by astrological principles both in his secular and religious 
activities. Even while undertaking a journey he is required to consult the astrologer and insists on leaving 
his home on an auspicious day and at an auspicious hour. In urgent and emergent cases, however, when 
he cannot afford to wait for an auspicious day, he is allowed to choose a lucky moment in the course 
of an hour and may leave at that moment. King Janaka is here referred to as having availed himself of 
this expedient. 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


613 

The malevolent Kaikeyi was writhing with remorse. To whom should she speak 
out her mind and whom could she blame? The people, on the other hand, rejoiced to 
think that their stay was ensured for some days more. In this way that day too was 
spent. The next morning everyone proceeded to bathe. And after their ablutions the 
men and women worshipped Lord Ganesa, Goddess Gauri (Siva’s Consort), Bhagavan 
Siva (the Slayer of the demon Tripura) and the Sun-god (the Dispeller of darkness). 
Again, they reverenced the feet of Bhagavan Visnu* (the Lord of Laksmi) and prayed, 
the men raising their joined palms, the women holding out the skirt of their garment ; 
“With Sri Rama our king and Sita (Janaka’s Daughter) our queen, may our capital 
Ayodhya, be gloriously repeopled with its various communities and grow to be the 
very culmination of joy; and may Sri Rama instal Bharata as the Crown Prince. Bathing 
all in the nectar of this bliss, let everyone, O Lord, reap the reward of his existence in 
this world.” (1 — 4) 
 “May Sri Rama rule over this city, assisted by his Guru, councillors and brothers. 
And may we die in Ayodhya with Sri Rama as still our king.” This was what everyone 
asked in prayer. (273) 

* The poet enumerates here the five principal deities of the Hindu pantheon. They are all believed to 
represent the Supreme Divinity; and a Hindu generally worships anyone of these or all the five together as his 
chosen deity or deities. 

614 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Hearing the affectionate words of the citizens even enlightened sages talked 
disparagingly of Yoga (asceticism) and dispassion. Having thus performed their daily 
devotions the citizens made obeisance to Sri Rama with a thrill of joy. Men and women 
of every rank — high, low or middling — were blessed with His sight according to their 
own conception. Sri Rama scrupulously honoured all and everyone praised the 
Storehouse of Compassion in the following words:”From his very boyhood it has been 
Sri Rama’s wont to observe the rules of propriety, duly recognizing the love one 
cherishes towards him. With a lovely and cheerful countenance, gracious looks and a 
guileless disposition the Lord of Raghus is an ocean of amiability and modesty.” Thus 
recounting the virtues of Sri Rama they were all overwhelmed with emotion and began 
to extol their good fortune:”There are few people in the world as meritorious as we, 
whom Sri Rama recognizes as his own!” (1 — 4) 
All were absorbed in love at that time, Presently on hearing of the approach of King 
Janaka, the lord of Mithila, Sri Rama, who was a veritable sun to the lotus-like solar race, 
and the whole assembly rose in a hurry (to receive him). (274) 

615 

Chapter 93
The Lord of Raghus led the way, accompanied by His younger brothers, the 
minister (Sumantra), the Guru (Vasistha) and the citizens. The moment the lord of 
Janakas* espied the great hill of Kamadanatha he made obeisance to it and dismounted 
from his car. Seized as they were with a longing and eagerness to see Sri Rama, none 
of the party felt the least toil or hardship of the journey. For their mind was with the Chief 
of Raghus and Vaidehi (Janaka’s Daughter); and when the mind is elsewhere, who will 
feel the bodily pain or pleasure? In this way Janaka came advancing with his party, their 
mind intoxicated with love. When the two parties drew near and saw one another they 
were overwhelmed with love and began to exchange greetings with due respect. King 
Janaka proceeded to adore the feet of the hermits (who hailed from Ayodhya); while Sri 
Rama, the Delighter of Raghus, made obeisance to the sages (who accompanied 
Janaka). Sri Rama and His younger brothers then greeted the king (their father-in-law) 
and led him with the whole party (to His hermitage). (1 — 4) 
Sri Rama’s hermitage was an ocean as it were, overflowing with the sacred water of 
quietism; while the host that accompanied Janaka was as it were, a river of pathos, which the 
Lord of Raghus was now conducting (to the ocean of His hermitage). (275) 
* Just like ‘Videha’, ’Janaka’ too was a title enjoyed by all the descendants of King Nimi. Hence the 
king of Mithila has been referred to here as the “lord of Janakas”. 




616 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The river flooded the banks of wisdom and dispassion and was joined in its 
course by tributary streams and rivulets in the form of sorrowful utterances. Sighs and 
lamentation severally represented the waves and the wind that uprooted the stout tree 
of fortitude standing on its banks. It had deep sorrow for its swift current, while fear 
and delusion constituted its numberless eddies and whirlpools. Boatmen in the form of 
the learned waited with big boats in the form of their learning; but they were unable to 
row them, because they had no idea of its depth. The Kolas and Kiratas that roamed 
about in the woods were the poor wayfarers who had lost heart at the sight of the 
turbulent stream and stood aghast. When the stream joined the ocean of the hermitage, 
the latter too surged up as it were with emotion. The two royal hosts were so excited 
with grief that they had no sense, fortitude or shame left. Extolling King Dasaratha’s 
comeliness of form, goodness and amiability they all wept and were plunged into an 
ocean of woe. (1 — 4) 
Plunged into the ocean of grief the men and women lamented in great anguish. 
They all angrily and reproachfully exclaimed, ’’Alas! What has cruel Fate done!” Of the 
gods, accomplished saints, ascetics, Yogis (mystics) and anchorites, whoever witnessed 
the condition of Janaka on that occasion, none, says Tulasidasa, was capable of enough 
to cross the river of love (to escape being drowned in it). 

AYODHYA-KANDA 



617 


Here and there the great sages admonished people in numberless ways; and the 
sage Vasistha said to Videha, “Be consoled, O king!” (276) 


Can the darkness of infatuation and attachment ever approach him (King Janaka), 
the sun of whose wisdom drives away the night of metempsychosis and the rays of 
whose speech delight the lotus-like sages? That he too was plunged in grief shows the 
triumph of the affection he bore for his daughter, Sita and Her lord, Sri Rama. According 
to the Vedas there are three types of embodied soul (human beings) in the world — the 
sensual, the seeker and the wise who have attained perfection (in the form of God- 
Realization). Of all these he alone is highly honoured in an assembly of holy men, whose 
heart is sweetened by love for Sri Rama. Wisdom without love for 6ri Rama is imperfect 
like a vessel without the helmsman. The sage Vasistha admonished King Videha in many 
ways; and now all the people bathed at the ghat associated with the name of Sri Rama 
(who generally bathed and said His prayers there). All the men and women were so 
overwhelmed with grief that the day passed without anyone taking a drop of water. Even 
the cattle, birds and deer remained without food, to say nothing of Sri Rama’s near and 
dear ones. (1 — 4) 
At daybreak both King Janaka (the lord of Nimis) and Sri Rama (the Lord of 
Raghus) bathed with all their retinue and sat under the banyan tree, sad at heart and 
wasted in body. (277) 

618 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The Brahmanas who hailed from King Dasaratha’s capital (Ayodhya) as well 
as those who came from King Janaka’s capital (Mithila) and even so Vasistha, the 
preceptor of the solar race, and Satananda, the family priest of King Janaka, who 
had explored the way to worldly prosperity as well as the path leading to blessedness, 
gave discourse cantaining righteousness, ethics, dispassion and discrimination. The 
sage Visvamitra (a descendant of Kusika) eloquently admonished the entire assembly 
with many a reference to ancient legends till the Lord of Raghus said to him, 
“Everyone, my lord, has remained without water since yesterday” Said the sage, 
“What the Lord of Raghus says is quite reasonable. It is already past noon even 
today.” Perceiving what was in the mind of the sage (Visvamitra) the King of Tirahuta 
(Mithila) replied, “It will not be proper to take cereals here.” The king’s reasonable 
reply pleased all; and having received the sage’s permission they proceeded to 
perform their midday ablutions. (1 — 4) 

At that moment arrived the people of the forest with large quantities of fruits, blossoms, 
leaves and roots of various kinds loaded in their panniers. (278) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 



619 
Chapter 94
By the grace of Sri Rama the hills yielded the objects of one’s desire and 
dispelled one’s sorrow by their very sight. The lakes, streams, woods and other parts 
of the land overflowed as it were with joy and love. The trees and creepers were all 
laden with fruits and blossoms, while birds and beasts and bees made a melodious 
concert. The forest was bursting with joy at that time; a cool, soft and fragrant breeze 
delighted everyone. The loveliness of the forest was past all telling; it seemed as if 
Earth herself was showing her hospitality of King Janaka. In the meantime all the 
citizens finished their ablutions and receiving the permission of Sri Rama, King Janaka 
and the sage Vasistha, they filled with love as they were selected suitable trees for them 
for their encampment; while leaves, fruits, roots and bulbs of every description — pure, 
lovely and delicious as ambrosia — (1 — 4) 
— Were sent to all, in basketfuls, with due courtesy by Vasistha, Sri Rama’s 
preceptor. And having worshipped the manes, the gods, the visitors and the Guru they 
began to partake of this holy repast. (279) 


620 
In this way four days rolled by; the people, both men and women, were gratified 
to see Sri Rama. In both camps the feeling uppermost in the heart of all was;” It is not 
good to return without Sita and Rama. Living in excile in the woods with Sita and Sri 
Rama one would be millions of times more happy than in Amaravati (the city of 
immortals). Leaving the company of Laksmana, Sri Rama and Sita he who chooses to 
live at his home is not favoured by Providence. The privilege of living in close proximity 
to Sri Rama can be had only when God is propitious to us all. Bathing in the Mandakini 
thrice everyday, the sight of Sri Rama, which is a perennial source of joy and 
blessedness, roaming about on the hill (Kamadanatha) associated with the name of Sri 
Rama, in the forest adjoining the same and among the hermitages of ascetics situated 
thereabout, and living on bulbs, roots and fruits delicious like ambrosia! In this way four 
years and ten will be happily spent like a minute without our knowing it. (1 — 4) 
 “We do not deserve this happiness.” all exclaimed; “Our luck is not like that.” Such 
was the natural and spontaneous devotion to Sri Rama’s feet in both the camps. (280) 
In this way all indulged in their own fancy; their affectionate words were so 
charming to hear. In the meantime Sita’s mother (Queen Sunayana) despatched her 
handmaids to King Dasaratha’s queens; and perceiving that it was a convenient hour 
they returned with that information. Having learnt that Sita’s mothers-in-law were at 

AYODHYA-KANDA 

621 
leisure the ladies of King Janaka’s gynaeceum called on them. Queen Kausalya 
(Sri Rama’s mother) received them with due honour and courtesy and offered 
them such seats as circumstances would permit. Nothing amiability and affection of 
all from both sides and hearing them as even the thunderbolt could melt. With 
their body thrilling all over and overpowered by emotion and eyes full of tears all 
began to sorrow and scratch the ground with the nails of their toes. They were all 
incarnations as it were of love for Sita and Sri Rama; it seemed as if Pathos 
herself mourned in so many forms. Said Sita’s mother, “The intellect of Providence 
is so pervose that He has thought fit to break up the foam of milk with a chisel of 
adamant! (1 — 4) 

 “We hear of nectar but see only venom: all His doings are hard. Crows, owls and 
herons are seen everywhere; but swans can be found in the Manasa lake alone.” (281) 
Hearing this Queen Sumitra (Laksmana’s mother) sorrowfully observed, “The 
ways of Providence are most perverse and strange: He creates, maintains and then 
destroys. God’s designs are as silly as child’s play.” Said Kausalya, “It is nobody’s fault; 
sorrow and joy, loss and gain are determined by our past actions. The inexorable ways 
of Providence are known to God alone, who dispenses all kinds of fruits, both good and 
evil. God’s commands prevail over all, including the processes of creation, maintenance 
and dissolution and even over poison and nectar (which destroy and restore life 
respectively). It is no use lamenting, O good lady, out of infatuation. The doings of 
Providence are, as I have said, inevitable and eternal. If we mourn over the contrast 

622 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 95
After considering the circumstances during the lifetime of king after his demise if we feel 
sorry it is because of our interests suffered.” Sita’s mother replied, “Your noble words are 
quite true, a spouse that you are of Ayodhya’s lord, who was the greatest of all virtuous 
souls known to history.” (1 — 4) 


“If Laksmana, Rama and Sita stay in the forest, the end will be good, not bad. 
But, said Kausalya with a heart overwhelmed with emotion.” I am anxious about 
Bharata. (282) 

“By the grace of God and through your blessing my sons and daughters-in-law are 
all pure as the water of the celestial stream (Gahga). Although I have never sworn by 
Rama, I now swear by him and tell you in good faith, my friend, that in extolling Bharata’s 
amiability, goodness, modesty, loftiness of character, brotherly affection, devotion, faith 
and nobility the wit of even Sarada (the goddess of speech) falters. Can the ocean be 
ladled out by means of an oyster-shell? I have always known Bharata to be the glory of 
his house and the king repeatedly told me so. Gold is tested by rubbing on the 
touchstone, and a precious stone on reaching the hands of an expert jeweller; while men 
are tested in times of emergency by their innate disposition. It was wrong on my part 
today to have spoken thus; but you know sorrow and affection leave one little reason.” 
On hearing these words, pure as the water of the celestial river, all the queens were 
overwhelmed with affection. (1 — 4) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


623 

Kausalya collected herself and continued: “Listen, O venerable queen of Mithila: 
who can advise you, the consort of King Janaka, who is an ocean of wisdom ? (283) 


“Yet finding a suitable opportunity, O queen, you may speak to the king as if on 
your own initiative and plead with him that Laksmana may be detained and Bharata 
allowed to proceed to the forest. Should this proposal find favour with the king, let him 
do his utmost after due deliberation. I feel much concerned about Bharata; for the love 
in his heart is so profound that if he stays at home I fear some thing untoward may 
happen to him.” Perceiving Kausalya’s pure love and hearing her guileless and eloquent 
appeal all the queens were overwhelmed by the pathetic sentiment. There was a shower 
of flowers from heaven accompanied by shouts of applause. Accomplished saints, Yogis 
(mystics) and hermits were overpowered with emotion. All the ladies of the gynaeceum 
were struck dumb to see this. Then, recovering herself, Sumitra interposed, “Madam! 
Nearly an hour of the night has passed.” Hearing this Sri Rama’s mother (Kausalya) 
courteously rose, and — (1 — 4) 
624 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


— Said out of affection and goodwill, “Pray return quickly to your camp. Our only 
refuge now is God and our only helper is the lord of Mithila.” (284) 

Seeing her affection and hearing her polite words Janaka’s beloved queen 
(Sunayana) clasped Kausalya’s holy feet. “Such modesty on your part, O venerable 
lady, is quite becoming of you, you being King Dasaratha’s spouse and Sri Rama’s 
mother. Great men treat with honour even the lowest of their servants: fire is crowned 
with smoke, while mountains bear grass on their tops. The king (of Mithila) is your 
servant in thought, word and deed; while the great Lord Siva and His Consort 
(Bhavani) are your constant helpers. Who on this earth is worthy of serving as your 
auxiliary? Can an ordinary light ever pose with any grace as a helper of the sun? After 
serving the term of his exile in the woods and accomplishing the object of the gods Sri 
Rama will reign undisturbed at Ayodhya; and protected by §rl Rama’s strength of arm 
gods, Nagas and human beings will dwell peacefully in their own abodes. This has all 
been predicted by the sage Yajnavalkya and a sage’s prophesy, madam, can never 
go in vain.” (1 — 4) 
So saying she fell at Kausalya’s feet with the utmost affection and preferred her 
request for being allowed to take Sita with her. And having received Kausalya’s kind 
permission Sita’s mother now left for her camp with Sita. (285) 
* AYODHYA-KANDA * 625 
Videha’s Daughter (Sita) greeted Her dear kinsfolk in the same manner as was 
befitting in each case. When they saw Janakl (Janaka’s Daughter) in the robes of an 
ascetic everybody was stricken with deep sorrow. Receiving the permission of Sri 
Rama’s preceptor, Vasistha, King Janaka too left for his camp and on arrival found Sita 
there. The king clasped Janaki to his bosom — Janaki who was an honoured guest of his 
unalloyed love and life. In his heart welled up an ocean of love and the king’s heart now 
appeared like the holy Prayaga. The immortal banyan tree in the shape of affection for 
Sita was seen growing with the divine babe of love for Sri Rama adorning its top. The 
long-lived sage (Markandeya)* in the form of King Janaka’s wisdom was greatly 
bewildered and was just going to be drowned when lo! he found his support in the divine 
babe and was saved. Really speaking, it was not that Videha’s wit was lost in infatuation; 
it was the triumph of the affection he bore for Sita and the Chief of Raghus. (1 — 4) 
* The story of Markandeya has been told at length in SrTmad Bhagavata (XII. 8 — 10). He is celebrated for his longevity (which will continue till the end of this Kalpa), which has earned for him the title of ‘Cirajivl. Won over by his austerities and devotion Bhagavan Narayana appeared in person before him and offered to grant him a boon. The sage, however requested that he might be allowed to witness the glory of His Maya. 
The Lord disappeared, assuring the sage that his prayer would be granted: 

One evening, while the sage was engaged in his devotion on the bank of the Puspabhadra river, it 
began to rain in torrents. The oceans outstepped their limits and deluged the earth as well as the heavens Even though he was an enlightened soul, the sage was much confused and alarmed; and tossed about by the furious waves and biasing winds he drifted along like a blind man for a long time. At last he espied a small island on which stood a young banyan tree. On the tree itself he saw, lying in a cup of leaves, a most charming babe of dark hue, holding in both of its tiny hauds one of its great toes and sucking it. The sage was enraptured to behold this extraordinary babe and at its very sight all his fatigue and pain disappeared. As the sage tried to approach the babe he was drawn by the breath of its nostrils into its stomach and saw the whole universe contained therein. After wandering there for a long time he was expelled from the stomach with the breath and found himself once more in the endless ocean with the banyan tree and the beautiful babe still before his eyes. The sage made one more attempt to approach the babe, when lo! the babe disappeared and the great deluge also vanished out of sight. 
626 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Overcome by the affection of Her parents Sita was too deeply moved to control 
Herself. But realizing the awkward moment and Her noble duty, Earth’s Daughter 
recovered Herself. (286) 
When King Janaka beheld Sita in the robes of a hermitess he was overwhelmed 
with love and was highly gratified. “Daughter, you have brought sancity to both the 
houses (viz., my house and the house of your husband); everyone says your fair 
renown has illumined the whole world. The river of your fame outshone the celestial 
stream (Gariga) in that it has penetrated (not only one solar system but) millions of 
universes. While the Gariga has (in the course of its career) exalted only three places,* 
the river of your fame has added to the glory of numerous congregations of holy men.” 
Even though Her father made these flowery yet truthful remarks out of affection for 
Her, Sita was drowned as it were, in a sea of bashfulness. Her parents pressed Her 
to their bosom once more and gave Her good and salutary advice and blessing. Sita 
did not speak but felt uncomfortable in Her mind because She thought that it was not 
good to remain with Her parents overnight. Reading Her mind the queen (Sunayana) 
made it known to the king (her husband) and both admired in their heart Her modesty 
and noble disposition. (1 — 4) 

* The three places referred to above are evidently (1) Haridvara (where the Gariga leaves the mountainous region and descends into the plains), (2)Prayaga (where it is joined by another sacred river, the Yamuna) and (3) the mouth of the river (popularly known by the name of Gangasagara). 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


627 

Meeting and embracing Slta again and again they politely allowed Her to depart 
and availing herself of this opportunity the clever queen eloquently told the king all about 
Bharata’s condition. (287) 

When the king heard of Bharata’s conduct, which was rare as a combination of 
gold with fragrance or as nectar extracted from the moon,* the king closed his tearful 
eyes and a through his body and with gleeful heart he paid encomiums to his marvellous 
glory. “Listen attentively, O fair-faced and bright-eyed lady; the story of Bharata loosens 
the bounds of worldly existence. Religion, statecraft and an enquiry about Brahma (the 
Infinite) are domains to which I have some access according to my own poor lights. But 
thought acquainted with these subjects, my wits cannot touch the shadow of Bharata’s 
glory even by trick, much less describe it. To Brahma (the Creator), Lord Ganapati 
(Ganesa) Sesa (the king of serpents), Lord Siva, Sarada (the goddess of learning), 
poets, scholers and wise men, the character fame, doings, righteousness, amiability, 
goodness and unsullied glory of Bharata are delightful to hear and appreciate. They surpass 
the celestial stream in purity and even nectar in taste. (1 — 4) 

 “Possessed of infinite virtues and a man above comparison, know Bharata alone 
* Nectar as found in the region of Nagas etc., is itself rare, but that, which forms the essence of the 
moon is even rarer. Hence the conduct of Bharata has been likened to the same. 
628 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


to be the like of Bharata. Can Mount Sumeru be likened to a seer?* Hence the wit of the race 
of poets was confused (in finding a comparison for him). (288) 
 “The greatness of Bharata, O fair lady, baffles all who attempt to describe it, even 
as a fish cannot glide on dry land. Listen, O beloved queen: Bharata’s inestimable glory 
is known to Sri Rama alone; but he too cannot describe it.” Having thus lovingly 
described Bharata’s glory the king, who knew his queen’s mind, continued, “If Laksmana 
returns to Ayodhya and Bharata accompanies Sri Rama to the woods, it will be well for 
all and that is what everyone wants. But the mutual affection and confidence, O good 
lady, of Bharata and Sri Rama (the chief of Raghus) are beyond one’s conception. Even 
though Sri Rama is the highest limb of equanimity, Bharata is the perfection of love and 
attachment. Bharata has never bestowed any thought on his spiritual or worldly interests 
or personal comforts. Devotion to Sri Rama’s feet is at once the means and the end; to 
my mind this appears to sum up Bharata’s creed. (1 — 4) 
“Bharata would never think of flouting Sri Rama’s orders even unwittingly. We 
need not, therefore, in our affection give way to anxiety,” said the king in choked 
accents. (289) 
* An Indian weight, nearly aquivalent to 2 pounds. 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
629 

As the king and queen (Janaka and Sunayana) were thus fondly recounting the 
virtues of Sri Rama and Bharata the night passed like an instant. At daybreak both the 
royal camps awoke and after finishing their ablutions proceeded to worship gods. 
Performing His ablutions the Lord of Raghus called on His Guru and after adoring his 
feet and receiving his tacit permission said, “Holy sir, Bharata, the citizens and my 
mothers are all stricken with grief and inconvenienced by their sojourn in the woods. The 
king of Mithila too and his followers have been enduring hardships for many days past. 
Therefore, my lord, do what is advisable under the circumstances. The welfare of all lies 
in your hands.” So saying Sri Rama felt much embarrassed. And the sage was thrilled 
with joy when he saw His amiability and kind disposition. “Without you, Rama, all 
amenities of life are like hell to both the royal camps. (1 — 4) 
 “Rama! you are the life of life, the soul of soul and the joy of joy.” Those who 
like to be in their home away from you, my child, are under the influence of an adverse 
fate. (290) 
630 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Perish the happiness, ritual and piety in which there is no devotion to the lotus feet 
of Rama (yourself). That Yoga (discipline conducive to union with God) is an abominable 
Yoga and that wisdom unwisdom, in which love for Rama yourself) is not supreme. 
Whosoever is unhappy is unhappy without you and even so whoever is happy is happy 
through you. You know what exists in the mind of a particular individual. Your command 
holds sway over all and your gracious self knows all the ways full well. You may return 
to your hermitage now.” The lord of sages was overpowered with emotion. Sri Rama then 
made obeisance and departed, while the sage collected himself and called on King 
Janaka. The preceptor repeated to the king Sri Rama’s naturally graceful words, which 
were full of amiability and affection, and added, “O great monarch, now do that which may 
do good to all without prejudice to religion.” (1 — 4) 
 “O king! you are a storehouse of wisdom, clever, pious and staunch in upholding 
the cause of virtue. Who save you is able at the present moment to find a way out of 
this impasse?” (291) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


631 
Chapter 96
Janaka was overwhelmed with emotion on hearing the sage’s words. His 
wisdom and dispassion themselves shrunk away from him when they saw his 
condition. Faint with love he reasoned to himself, “I have not done well in coming over 
to this place, King Dasaratha no doubt told Sri Rama to proceed to the woods; but at 
the same time he demonstrated the love he bore towards his beloved son. As for 
ourselves we shall now send him from this forest to another and return in triumph 
glorying over our wisdom!” Seeing and hearing all this the ascetics, hermits and 
the Brahmanas were overwhelmed with emotion. Realizing the situation, the king 
took heart and proceeded with his followers to see Bharata; while the latter came 
ahead to receive him and gave him the best seat available in the circumstances. “Dear 
Bharata,” said the king of Tirhut, “you know the disposition of Sri Rama (the Hero of 
Raghu’s line).” (1—4) 
 “Sri Rama is true to his vow and devoted to his Dharma; he respects the feelings 
and affection of all. On account of the consideration of others’ in conveniences Rama 
feels disconcerted. Now give me your final word, so that the same may be communicated 
to him.” (292) 

When Bharata heard these words, a thrill ran through his body and his eyes filled 
632 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


with tears. Imposing a great restraint upon himself he said, “My lord, you are dear and 
worthy of respect to me as my own father; and as regards my family preceptor (the sage 
Vasistha) my own parents are not so benevolent to me as he.” Here is an assembly 
of sages like Kausika (Visvamitra) as well as of ministers; and today you too, an ocean 
of wisdom, are present in our midst. Know me to be a mere child and an obedient 
servant and instruct me accordingly, my master. To think that you should seek my 
advice in this assembly (of wise men) and at this holy place! Yet if I keep mum I shall 
be considered black of heart; and if I speak on this occasion it will be sheer madness 
on my part. Nevertheless I have the impudence to say some thing. Therefore, pray 
forgive me, father, knowing that Providence is against me. It is fully recognized in the 
Tantras, Vedas and Puranas, and all the world knows, that the duty of a servant is hard 
indeed. Duty to a master is incompatible with selfishness. Hatred is blind and love is 
not discreet. (1 — 4) 
 “Therefore, knowing me to be a dependant, and with due deference to Sri Rama’s 
wishes and consistent with his Drama and sacred vow, pray do that which all approve 
and is good for all, recognizing the affection everyone bears for him.” (293) 
On hearing Bharata’s words and observing his disposition King Janaka and his 
followers applauded him. Easily intelligible yet incomprehensible, soft and sweet yet hard, 
pregnant with a vast meaning though too concise, his mysterious speech was as baffling 
as the reflection of one’s face seen in a mirror, which cannot be grasped even though 
the mirror be held in one’s own hand. King Janaka, Bharata, the sage (Vasistha) and 

* AYODHYA-KANDA * 633 

the whole assembly called on Sri Rama, who delights the gods even as the moon brings 
joy to the lilies. On hearing this news all the people were overwhelmed with anxiety 
even as fish on coming in contact with the water of the first shower (of the monsoon). 
The gods first observed the condition of the family preceptor (the sage Vasistha) and 
next watched the great affection of King Videha. And then they beheld Bharata, the 
very incarnation of devotion to Sri Rama. Seeing all this the selfish gods felt unnerved 
and lost heart. When they saw everyone full of love for Sri Rama, the gods were 
immensely perturbed. (1 — 4) 
 “Sri Rama, is full of love and consideration for others’ feelings.” Indra (the lord of 
celestials) despondently said, “Therefore, combine to contrive some underhand plot all of 
you; or else we are doomed.” (294) 
The gods invoked goddess Sarada and praised her. They said,“0 goddess, we 
celestials have sought refuge in you; pray protect us. Change Bharata’s mind by exerting 
your Maya (deluding potency) and preserve the heavenly race from ruin by taking them 
under the cool shade of some deceptive trick.” When the wise goddess heard the gods’ 
prayer, she understood that selfishness had robbed them of their senses, and accordingly 
replied (turning towards Indra in particular), “You ask me to alter Bharata’s mind ! It is a pity 
you cannot see Mount Meru even though you possess a thousand eyes. The Maya (deluding 
potency) even of Brahma (the Creator), Hari (the Preserver) and Hara (the Destroyer of 
the universe), exceedingly powerful as it is, cannot even face Bharata’s reason. And yet 
you ask me to pervert it. What! Can the moonlight steal away the sun? Bharata’s heart is 
634 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


the abode of Sita and Sri Rama; can darkness enter where the sun shines?” So saying goddess 
Sarada returned to Brahma’s heaven, leaving the gods as distressed as the Cakravaka bird 
at night. (1 — 4) 

The gods, who were selfish by nature and malicious at heart, laid an ill-conceived 
plot and weaving a powerful net of deceptive artifice set up a wave of fear, confusion, 
ennui and vexation (among the people of Ayodhya). (295) 

Having started the mischief the lord of celestials thought within himself that the 
success and failure of his plans lay in Bharata’s hands. (Now reverting to Citrakuta) King 
Janaka went to the Lord of Raghus, the Glory of the solar race received them all with 
honour. The priest of Raghu’s line then spoke words which were appropriate to the 
occasion as well as to the assembly in which he spoke and consistent with righteousness. 
He reproduced the conversation that had taken place between King Janaka and Bharata 
and also repeated the charming speech of Bharata. “Dear Rama,” he said, “whatever 
order you give all should obey: this is my proposal.” Hearing this the Lord of Raghus, with 
joined palms and in gentle accents, spoke words which were true and guileless: “In the 
presence of yourself and the lord of Mithila it will be altogether unseemly on my part to 
say anything. Whatever order may be given by you and by the king of Mithila, everyone, 
I swear by yourself, will positively bow to it.” (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
635 

Chapter 97
On hearing Sri Rama’s oath the sage Vasistha and King Janaka as well as the 
whole assembly were embarrassed. All fixed their eyes on Bharata, as no one could make 
any answer. (296) 
When Bharata saw the assembly confused, Sri Rama’s brother exercised great 
self-restraint and realizing the unfavourable situation he controlled his emotion even as 
the jar-born sage Agastya* had arrested the growth of the Vindhya range. The demon 
Hiranyaksa in the form of grief had carried away the globe in the shape of the assembly’s 
wit, which was the source of the entire creation in the form of a host of virtues, when 
the gigantic boar of Bharata’s discretion playfully delivered the same in no timef. Bharata 

* In the Mahabharata (Vanaparva, Ch. 104) we read how the sun-god, who perambulates Mount 
Sumeru everyday, was once asked by the deity presiding over the Vindhya range to revolve round that 
mountain as well. The sun-god, however, declined on the plea that his course had been determined by the Lord of the universe and that be could not deviate from the same. This enraged Vindhya, who grew taller and taller in order to impede the course of the sun and the moon. Alarmed at this the gods sought the help of the mighty sage Agastya, who approached Vindhya, and asked the mountain-spirit to allow him passage for proceeding to the south. Vindhya accordingly prostrated himself before the sage and thus made it easy for him to cross it. The sage bound him on oath to remain in that position till his return. He, however, never returned from the south since then and the mountain has remained in that position till now. In this way he was able to arrest the heavenward growth of the mountain. 

f The metaphor has been taken from the story of Hiranyaksa, which has been told at length in SrTmad Bhagavata (Book III. Ch. 13,18 and 19). At the beginning of creation when Manu and Satarupa took their descent from Brahma, the couple asked their progenitor to allot them their duty. Brahma asked them to procreate and thus propagate the human species. Manu, however, saw that the globe lay submerged under water, and thus found no solid ground to stand upon. He complained about it to Brahma, who became thoughtful and began to meditate. And presently a tiny boar of the size of a human thumb issued from one of his nostrils and in the twinking of an eye assumed the dimensions of a huge mountain. Brahma and His mind-born sons, MarTci and others, at first wondered who the creature was; but at last they concluded that the Lord 
636 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


bowed his head and joined his palms before all and thus prayed to Sri Rama, King 
Janaka, his preceptor (the sage Vasistha) and other holy men present there, “With my 
juvenile lips I am going to make a harsh statement. Kindly forgive today this most 
unbecoming act of mine.” He now invoked in his heart the charming goddess 6arada, who 
came from the Manasarovara lake of his mind to his lotus-like mouth. Bharata’s speech, 
which was full of pure wisdom, piety and prudence, resembled a lovely cygnet (in that 
it possessed the virtue of sifting goodness from evil). (1 — 4) 
Bharata saw with the eyes of his wisdom that the assembly was faint with love. 
He, therefore, made obeisance to all and, invoking Sita and the Lord of Raghus, spoke 
as follows: — (297) 
 “O Lord, you are my father, mother, friend, preceptor, master, the object of my 
adoration, my greatest benefactor and my inner controller. Nay, you are a guileless and 
kind patron, the storehouse of amiability, the protector of the suppliant, all-knowing, 
clever, all-powerful, the befriender of those who take refuge in you, apt to appreciate merit 
Himself had taken that form in order to remove their anxiety. In the meantime the divine Boar dived into the ocean that had swallowed the earth at the time of the final dissolution and presently emerged it with the earth held secure on His tusks. 

The demon Hiranyaksa, who had already learnt that the boar was no other than the almighty Lord Visnu, appeared before the Lord, mace in hand, and challenged Him to a duel. The Lord placed the earth on the water, propped it against His own sustaining power and turning towards the demon slew him after a hard struggle. 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
637 
and drive away vice and sin. You are the only master like you, my lord; while I am unique 
in disloyalty to my master. Setting at naught in my folly the commands of my lord (yourself) 
and my father I came here with multitude of men and women. In this world there are good 
men and vile, high and low, nectar and immortality, on the one hand, and venom and 
death on the other. But nowhere have I seen or heard anyone who dare violate Sri Rama’s 
(your) orders even in thought. Yet that is what I have presumed to do not only in thought 
but even in word and deed and my lord has taken this presumption on my part as a token 
of affection and an act of service. (1 — 4) 
 “By his grace and goodness my lord has done me a good turn; my failings have 
become my adornments and my fair and bright renown has spread on all sides.” (298) 

“Your ways, your noble disposition and your greatness are known throughout the 
world and have been glorified in the Vedas and other sacred books. Even the cruel, the 
perverse, the vile, the evil-minded and the censured, nay, the low-minded, the impudent, 
the godless and the unscrupulous are known to have been accepted by you as your own 
as soon as you heard that they had approached you for shelter and if they merely bowed 
to you only once. You have never taken their faults to heart even if you saw them with 
your own eyes; while you have proclaimed their virtues in the assembly of holy men if 
you but heard of them. Where is the master, so kind to his servant, who would provide 
him with all his necessaries himself and, far from reckoning even in a dream what he 
has done for his servant would feel troubled at heart over any embarrassment caused to 







638 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


him? He is my lord (yourself) and no other; with uplifted arms I declare this on oath. A 
beast would dance and a parrot may attain proficiency in repeating what it is taught; but 
the proficiency of the bird and the rhythmic movements of the beast depend on the 
teacher and the dancing-master.” (1 — 4) 
 “Thus by reforming your servants and treating them with honour you have made 
them the crest-jewels of holy men. Is there anyone save the All-merciful (yourself) who 
will rigidly maintain his high reputation (as a kind and generous master)?” (299) 
 “Through grief, affection or mere childishness I came here in defiance of your 
commands; yet, true to his own disposition, my gracious lord (yourself) has taken my 
insolence in good part in everyway. I have seen your most blessed feet and come to 
know that my master (yourself) is naturally propitious to me. In this august assembly I 
have seen my good fortune in that I continue to enjoy my master’s affection in spite of 
great remissness on my part. My all-gracious lord (yourself) has been extremely kind and 
compassionate to me in everyway; all this is more than I have ever deserved. By virtue 
of his own amiability, noble disposition and goodness my lord (yourself) has ever been 
indulgent to me. Giving up all consideration for the feelings of my master and this 
assembly I have presumed too much by speaking politely or impolitely even as it pleased 
me; but perceiving my great distress I am sure my lord will pardon me.” (1 — 4) 


AYODHYA-KANDA 


639 
Chapter 98
“It is a great mistake to say too much to a loving, intelligent and good master. 
Therefore, be pleased, my lord, to give your command; for you have accomplished all my 
objects.” (300) 
 “Swearing by the dust of my lord’s lotusfeet, which is the glorious consummation 
of truth, virtue and happiness, I proclaim the desire which I have cherished in my heart 
at all time, whether waking, dreaming or fast asleep. It is to serve my master with 
guileless and spontaneous affection forgetting my own interests and neglecting the four 
ends of human existence. And the greatest service to a noble master is to obey his 
orders. Let your servant, my lord, obtain this favour (in the form of an order).” So saying 
he was utterly overwhelmed with emotion; a thrill ran through his body and tears rushed 
to his eyes. In great distress he clasped the Lord’s lotusfeet; the excitement of the 
moment and the intensity of affection cannot be described in words. The Ocean of 
Compassion honoured him with kind words and taking him by the hand seated him by 
His side. The whole assembly including the Lord of Raghus Himself was overpowered 
by love after hearing Bharata’s entreaty and seeing his disposition. (1 — 4) 




640 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The Lord of Raghus, the congregation of holy men, the sage Vasistha and the lord 
of Mithila, all were faint with love and admired in their heart the surpassing glory of 
Bharata’s brotherly affection and devotion. The gods acclaimed Bharata and rained down 
flowers on him as though with a doleful heart. Hearing of this, says TulasTdasa, everyone 
felt distressed and uncomfortable even as lotuses get withered at the approach of night. 
Seeing every man and woman both of Ayodhya and Mithila afflicted and downcast, 
Indra, who was most malicious at heart, sought his own happiness by killing those that 
were already dead. (301) 
Though king of the gods, Indra is the worst specimen of deceitfulness and villainy; he 
loves others’ loss and his own gain. The ways of Indra (the slayer of the demon Paka) are like 
those of a crow — crafty, malicious and trusting none. Having conceived an evil design in the 
first instance he wove a net of wiles and made everyone a victim of ennui by throwing the net 
on the head of each. He then infatuated all by exerting the deluding potency of the gods; but 
they could not be wholly deprived of the affection they bore for Sri Rama. Overcome as they 
all were by fear and ennui, they were all distracted. Now they conceived a liking for the woods 
and the very next moment they loved to be at their home. The people were afflicted by this 
vacillating attitude of their mind even as the water at the mouth of a river is tossed on both 
sides. Wavering in mind, they did not derive solace anywhere nor did they disclose their heart 




AYODHYA-KANDA 


641 


to one another. Observing this, the all-compassionate Lord smiled within Himself and said, 
“The canine race, Indra and reckless youth are alike* in nature.” (1 — 4) 
Barring Bharata, King Janaka, the host of sages, the ministers and 
enlightened saints, the deluding potency of the gods prevailed on all according to 
the susceptibility of each. (302) 
The Ocean of Compassion Sri Rama, saw the people agitated, on the one hand, 
by the affection they bore towards Himself and on the other, by the mighty trick played 
by Indra, the lord of celestials. The assembly, King Janaka, the preceptor (the sage 
Vasistha), the other Brahmanas and the ministers, all had their wits hampered by 
Bharata’s devotion (to Sri Rama). Like figures drawn in a painting they regarded Sri 
Rama and uttered with diffidence words which they had been taught to repeat as it were. 
Bharata’s affection, courtesy, modesty and nobility were delightful to hear but difficult to 
describe. Seeing a minute particle of his devotion the host of sages and the King of 
Mithila were absorbed in love; how, then, can I, Tulasidasa, speak of his glory? It is his 
devotion and noble sentiments that have inspired sublime thoughts in the poet’s mind. 
When it came to know of its own poverty and the magnitude of Bharata’s glory, it shrank 
into itself out of respect for the barriers imposed by the race of bards. Though greatly 


* The nominal bases Svana (a dog), Yuvan (a young gallant) and Maghavan (Indra) are declined 
in the same way according to the Sarhskrta grammar (vide Panini’s aphorism ’). The poet 

ingeniously traces this verbal affinity to a natural affinity existing between the three. 

642 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

enamoured of his virtues it is unable to describe them; the poet’s wit finds itself as 
helpless as an infant’s speech. (1 — 4) 

Chapter 99
Bharata’s untarnished glory is like the moon without its spot while the poet’s 
brilliant wit is like the young of a Cakora bird that remains gazing with unwinking eyes 
when it sees the moon rising in the heavens of a guileless devotee’s heart. (303) 
Bharata’s noble sentiment cannot be easily grasped even by the Vedas; pardon, 
therefore, O poets! the frivolity of my poor wits. By discussing Bharata’s genuine love 
who will not get devoted to the feet of Sita and Sri Rama? Is there anyone so vile as the 
man who is not easily inspired with love for Sri Rama by the very thought of Bharata? 
Seeing the plight of all and knowing what was in the mind of His devotee (Bharata) and 
after fully considering the place, time, occasion and gathering, the all-merciful and all- 
knowing Sri Rama, the Lord of Raghus, who was a champion of virtue, self-possessed 
and prudent, and an ocean of truth, love, amiability and joy, nay, who respected the laws 
of propriety and was faithful in His love, spoke words which formed the very essence 
as it were of eloquence and which were salutary in consequence and sweet as nectar 
to hear: “Dear Bharata, you are an upholder of righteousness, well-versed in secular lore 
as well as in the Vedas and adept in love.” (1 — 4) 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


643 
 “Pure in thought, word and deed, you are your only compeer, dear brother. In this 
assembly of elders and in such adverse circumstances how can I recount the virtues 
of a younger brother?” (304) 
 “You are conversant, dear brother, with the traditions of the solar race, and know 
how truthful and how fond of fame our father was. You are also alive to the gravity of 
the occasion, the circumstances in which we are placed and the consideration we should 
have for the feelings of our elders and further know the mind of your friends, foes and 
neutrals. You are also aware of everyone’s duty as well as of what is best for you and 
me and of what we should do. I have entire confidence in you; yet I say something 
appropriate to the occasion. In the absence of our father, dear brother, all our interests 
have been conserved by the goodwill of our preceptor’s family; otherwise our subjects, 
our kinsmen, our own people and ourselves, all would have been undone. If the sun (the 
lord of the day) sets before time, tell me, who in this world will not be subjected to 
hardship? A similar calamity was visited upon us by Providence, but the sage Vasistha 
and the lord of Mithila saved everything.” (1 — 4) 
 “Not only the affairs of the state, but our honour and fair name, our virtue, land, riches 
and houses, everything will be protected by our Guru’s glory and all will be well in the end.” 
(305) 


644 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 100
 “At home as well as in the woods our preceptor’s goodwill alone will protect both 
you and me as well as those about us. Obedience to one’s father and mother, preceptor 
and master is the prop of all virtues, even as Sesa (the lord of serpents) supports the 
globe on his head. Therefore, obey their commands yourself and help me do the same, 
and be the saviour of the solar race, dear brother. This is the one discipline that bestows 
all success upon the striver and like the triple stream of the Gariga, Yamuna and Sarasvati 
at Prayaga combines fame, salvation and prosperity. Considering this and even though 
enduring great hardship make your subjects and your own people happy. My woe has 
been shared by all; but your lot will be the hardest for the whole term of my exile. I know 
you to be tender-hearted, yet am speaking repugnant words to you; but the time are so 
out of joint that this will not be unjustifiable on my part. In hard times good brothers alone 
stand one in good stead; it is by one’s arms alone that one parries the strokes even of 
a thunderbolt.” (1 — 4) 
 “Servants should be like hands, feet and eyes; while a master should be like a 
mouth.* Hearing of this (ideal) way of love (between a master and his servants) good 
poets offer their tribute to the same.” (306) 

* While hands, feet and eyes minister to the mouth by supplying food to it, the mouth in its turn, though 
appearing to accept and appropriate the whole of it to itself, equitably distributes the benefit of it to all the organs by nourishing and revitalizing them in due proportion, so should a master while taking service from his servants and giving none to them in return should nourish them and keep them whole. 
AYODHYA-KANDA 


645 

Hearing the speech of Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghus), which was imbued as it 
were, with the nectar churned out of the ocean of love, the whole assembly was lost in a 
trance of affection. Even goddess Sarada was struck dumb at their sight. Bharata 
derived supreme consolation; now that his master was propitious to him, woe and evil 
turned away from him. He now wore a cheerful countenance and the heaviness of his 
heart was gone; it seemed as if a dumb man had been favoured by the goddess of 
speech. He then made loving obeisance and spoke with his lotus palms joined 
together: “My lord, I have derived the joy of having accompanied you and have also 
obtained the reward of being born into this world. Now, my gracious lord, whatever be 
Your command, I will bow to it and carry it out with reverence. Pray vouchsafe to me, 
good sir, some tangible support by serving which I may be enabled to reach the end of 
the term of your exile. (1 — 4) 
 “In obedience to our preceptor’s command, my lord, I have brought for your coronation 
water from all holy places; what are your orders respecting the same ?” (307) 

646 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 101
 “I have one great longing at heart; but due to fear and diffidence I am unable to 
mention it.” ‘Tell me, dear brother, what it is.” Thus receiving the Lord’s permission Bharata 
replied in words sweetened by love: “With your permission I would go and see Citrakuta 
with its sacred spots, holy places and woods, birds and beasts, lakes and streams, 
springs and hills and particularly the land adorned with my lord’s footprints.” “Certainly, do 
as the sage Atri bids you do, dear brother, and wander without fear through the woods. 
It is the sage’s blessing, brother, which makes the forest so auspicious, holy and 
exquisitely beautiful. Deposit the water from holy places wherever the chief of sages, 
Atri, directs you.” On hearing the reply of his lord Bharata rejoiced and cheerfully went 
and bowed his head at the lotus-feet of the sage (Atri). (1 — 4) 
The selfish gods, when they heard this conversation between Bharata and Sri 
Rama, which was a source of all felicities, applauded the race of Raghu and rained down 
flowers from the tree of paradise. (308) 

* AYODHYA-KANDA * 647 
 “Praised be Bharata and glory to our lord, Sri Rama!” exclaimed the gods with 
great exultation. The sage Vasistha, the lord of Mithila and everyone else in the 
assembly rejoiced to hear Bharata’s words. Thrilling all over with joy King Videha 
extolled the host of virtues and affection both of Bharata and Sri Rama. The ministers 
and all others present in the assembly were overwhelmed with love even as they began 
to praise, each according to the best of his ability, the charming disposition both of the 
master and the servant, their fidelity and love, the purest of the pure. In both camps 
a mixed feeling of joy and sorrow throbbed in the heart of all as they continued to hear 
the conversation between Sri Rama and Bharata. Realizing joy and sorrow alike, Sri 
Rama’s mother comforted the other queen-mothers (her co-wives) by recounting Sri 
Rama’s virtues. Some would glorify the Hero of Raghu’s race, while others praised 
Bharata’s goodness. (1 — 4) 

Then said Atri to Bharata, “There is a beautiful well adjoining the hill; the water from 
the sacred places, which is so holy, sweet as nectar and incomparable, may be 
deposited in it.” (309) 
648 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 102
On receiving Atri’s command, Bharata despatched (ahead of himself) all the 
vessels containing the holy water and himself repaired with his younger brother 
(Satrughna) and the sage Atri and other hermits and holy men to the well, which was 
fathomless in its depth, and deposited the holy water in that sacred place. Transported 
with joy the sage Atri lovingly spoke thus: “This place has brought success to the striver 
from time without beginning; having been obscured by time it was known to none. My 
servants marked this soil as rich in subterranean springs of water and dug a big well 
in it with a view to securing good water. By a decree of Providence the whole world 
has been benefited (by dropping in this well the water from holy places) and the idea 
of religious merit (accruing from a bath in this well), which was most incomprehensible 
(to the ordinary intellect) has become easily intelligible to all. People will now call it by the 
name of Bharatakupa (a well sacred to the memory of Bharata). Its sanctity has been 
inhanced because water from all holy places has been mixed into it. People who take 
a plunge into it with devotion and with due ceremony will become pure in thought, word 
and deed. (1 — 4) 
Telling one another the glory of the well all returned to the hermitage of Sri Rama, 
the Lord of Raghus; and the sage Atri pointed out to the Chief of Raghus the purifying 
power of that holy place. (310) 
The night was pleasantly spent in narrating sacred legends with love till it was 
dawn. Having finished their daily morning routine and receiving the permission of Sri 
Rama, Atri and the preceptor (the sage Vasistha), the two brothers, Bharata and 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
649 
Satrughna, proceeded on foot to roam about in the forest associated with the name of 
Sri Rama, accompanied by their followers, all in simple attire. Feeling inwardly uncomfortable 
at the thought that the two brothers walked without shoes on their tender feet, Earth 
smoothened her surface and hid into her body all disagreeable, hard and unsightly things 
such as the spiky blades of Kusa grass, thorns, stones and crevices. In this way Earth 
made the path delightful and smooth, while a refreshing breeze breathed cool, soft and 
fragrant. The gods rained down flowers; the clouds afforded shade; the trees blossomed 
and bore fruit; the grass made the earth’s surface soft; the deer cast their charming 
glances; while the birds whispered their sweet notes: in this way all offered their services 
to the two princes, whom they knew to be Sri Rama’s beloved brothers. (1 — 4) 
When all supernatural powers become easily attainable to an ordinary individual 


who utters the name of ‘Rama’ even while 
who was dear to Rama as His own life. 


yawning, this is no great honour to Bharata, 

( 311 ) 
Chapter 103
In this way Bharata roamed about in the forest; even hermits felt abashed to 
see his devotion and austerity. The sacred ponds and tracts of land, the birds and 
beasts, the trees and grasses, the hills, woods and orchards were charming, wonderful 
and pre-eminently holy. Seeing them all so divine, Bharata asked questions about them; 
and in reply to them the great sage Atri told him with a glad heart the origin, name, 
attributes and purifying virtues of each. Taking a dip at one place they made obeisance 
at another; here they beheld sights that were ravishing to the soul, while there they 
sat down with the permission of the sage and thought of Sita and the two brothers 

650 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


(Sri Rama and Laksmana). Seeing Bharata’s good disposition, affection, and loyal 
services the sylvan gods gladly gave him their blessing. The third watch of the day 
would be half spent when the two brothers returned to their camp and gazed upon the 
lotus-feet of their lord. (1 — 4) 
Bharata visited all the sacred spots in five days. The (last) day was spent in 
discussing the shining glory of Hari (Bhagavan Visnu) and Hara (Lord Siva) till it was 
dusk. (312) 


On the morrow, after bathing, the whole assembly met again — Bharata, the 
Brahmanas and the King of Tirahuta (Mithila). Though knowing at heart that the day was 
auspicious (for undertaking a return journey to Ayodhya) the tender-hearted Sri Rama 
hesitated to say so. Sri Rama looked at His preceptor (the sage Vasistha), King Janaka 
and the assembly; but the very next moment He felt nervous and turned His eyes to 
the ground. Praising His regard for others’ feelings the whole assembly thought that 
nowhere could one find a master so considerate as Sri Rama. Bharata, who was clever 
enough to perceive Sri Rama’s wish, lovingly rose and imposing great restraint upon 
himself fell prostrate on the ground. Then, joining his palms, he lovingly said, “My lord, 
you have granted me all my desires. For my sake everybody has suffered a good 
deal of trouble and you too have been put to much inconvenience. Now, my lord, give 
me your permission to leave, so that I may go back to Ayodhya and remain there till 
your return.” (1 — 4) 


AYODHYA-KANDA 

Chapter 104
 “Admonish me, O gracious Lord of Kosala, and tell me some means by practising 
which for the remaining period of your exile your servant (myself) may be enabled to 
behold the feet of his merciful master again.” (313) 
“Your citizens, your kinsmen and your other subjects too, my lord, are all hallowed 
and steeped in joy because of the love they bear for you and the relationship they have 
with you. It is better to be tormented by the agonies of birth and death for your sake; 
while without you, my lord, it is no use attaining the supreme state (of blessedness). 
Knowing the hearts of all and even so the liking and longings of your servant’s heart as 
well as his way of life, my all-wise lord, who is a protector of the suppliant, will protect 
all, and will take care of them, both in this world and in the next, till the last. I am fully 
confident of this in everyway; and when I ponder this, I am not in the least disturbed 
about it. My own distress and my lord’s Kindness have both combined to make me 
impudent. Correcting this great fault of mine, my master, instruct this servant of yours 
without reserve.” Everyone who heard Bharata’s prayer applauded it and said, “This 
supplication of Bharata is like a cygnet, that sifts milk from water.” (1 — 4) 
652 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


The all-wise Sri Rama, the befriender of the afflicted, when He heard the meek and 
guileless speech of His brother (Bharata), replied in terms appropriate to the place, time 
and occasion: — (314) 
 “Brother, — it is our preceptor (the sage Vasistha) and King Janaka who take 
thought for you and me as well as for our people, whether we be at home or in the 
forest. So long as our preceptor, the sage (Visvamitra) and the lord of Mithila are our 
guardians, neither you nor I can even dream of trouble. For us two brothers, you as 
well as myself, the highest achievement of our human life, nay, our material gain, our 
glory, our virtue and our highest spiritual gain consist in this that both of us should obey 
our father’s command. It is in vindicating the king’s (our father’s) reputation (by 
implementing his word) that our good lies both in the eyes of the world and in the 
estimation of the Vedas. Those who follow the advice of their preceptor, father, mother 
and master, never stumble even if they tread a wrong path. Pondering thus and putting 
away all anxiety go and rule over Ayodhya till the appointed period. The responsibility 
for the protection of our land, treasury, kinsmen and our own people rests on the dust 
of our preceptor’s feet. As for yourself you should protect the earth, your subjects and 
your capital in accordance with the advice of your preceptor (the sage Vasistha), 
mothers and the minister (Sumantra). (1 — 4) 
 “A chief should be like the mouth, which alone does all the eating and drinking but 
supports and nourishes all the other limbs with discretion, says Tulasidasa.” (315) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


653 

Chapter 104
 “The essence of a king’s duty is only this much, which lies hidden in the Sastras, 
even as a desire is cherished in the heart (before it is expressed).” The Lord comforted 
His brother (Bharata) in many ways; but without some prop his mind found no 
consolation or rest. His regard for Bharata, on the one hand, and the presence of 
elders and ministers, on the other, overwhelmed the Lord of Raghus with a mixed 
feeling of embarrassment and affection. The Lord at last took compassion on him and 
gave him His wooden sandals, which Bharata reverently placed on his head. The 
sandals of the all-merciful Lord were like two watchmen entrusted with, the duty of 
guarding the people’s life or they might be compared to a pair of caskets to enshrine 
the jewel of Bharata’s love or to the two syllables (constituting the word ‘Rama’) 
intended for the (spiritual) practice of the human soul. Or they might be likened to a pair 
of doors to guard the race (of Raghu) or a pair of hands to assist in the performance 
of good deeds or again to a pair of eyes to show the noble path of service. Bharata 
was highly pleased to get this prop; he felt as happy as if Sita and Sri Rama had 
agreed to stay (in Ayodhya). (1 — 4) 
He made obeisance and begged leave to depart and Sri Rama clasped him to his 
bosom; while the malevolent lord of celestials, taking advantage of this adverse situation 
made the people weary. (316) 
654 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
That mischief, however, proved a boon to all; it helped to sustain their life like the 
hope of Sri Rama’s returning to Ayodhya on the expiry of His term of exile. Otherwise 
people would have succumbed to the fell disease of separation from Laksmana, Sita and 
Rama in great agony. By Sri Rama’s grace the imbroglio was resolved and the gods, 
who were hostilely disposed (towards the people of Ayodhya), now turned out helpful as 
allies. Sri Rama locked His brother, Bharata, in a close embrace; the ecstasy of His love 
cannot be described in words. His body, mind and speech overflowed with love and the 
firmest of the firm lost all firmness. His lotus eyes streamed with tears; even the 
assembly of gods was grieved to see His condition. The host of sages (assembled 
there), the preceptor (the sage Vasistha) and a champion of firmness like Janaka, the 
gold of whose mind had been tested in the fire of wisdom, nay, who were created by 
Brahma as free from all attachment and were born in this world even as the lotus springs 
up from water (and yet remains ever above it) — (1 — 4) 
— Even they were overwhelmed in mind, body and speech and lost all reason and 
dispassion when they saw incomparable and boundless affection of Sri Rama (the Chief 
of Raghus) and Bharata. (317) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
655 
The affection (of Sri Rama and Bharata) which baffled the wits of King Janaka and 
the preceptor (Vasistha), — it would be a great blunder to call it mundane. People would 
account the poet hard-hearted if they heard him describe the parting of Sri Rama (the 
Chief of Raghus) and Bharata. The rapture of that delicacy was past all telling; thinking 
of the love that manifested itself on the occasion even eloquence shrunk into itself. Sri 
Rama (the Chief of Raghus) first embraced Bharata and consoled him; and then He 
gladly clasped Satrughna to His bosom. Reading Bharata’s mind his servants and 
ministers all left and set about their respective duties. The people in both the camps were 
sore distressed to learn this and began to prepare for the return journey. The two brothers 
(Bharata and Satrughna) adored the lotus-feet of their lord and bowing to the orders of 
Sri Rama they set out on their journey. They supplicated the sages, ascetics and sylvan gods 
and honoured them again and again. (1 — 4) 
Bharata then embraced Laksmana, while Satrughna bowed to him and both placed 
the dust of Sita’s feet on their head; and receiving Her loving benediction, which was the 
root of all fair blessings, they departed. (318) 

656 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 105
Sri Rama with His younger brother (Laksmana) bowed His head to King Janaka 
and supplicated and extolled him in many ways: “Moved by compassion for us, my lord, 
you suffered much and came all the way to this forest with your retinue. Now kindly 
bestow your blessings on us and return to your capital.” At this the king took courage 
and departed. The Lord also treated with honour the sages and other Brahmanas and 
holy men and bade good-bye to them with the same respect as is due to Hari (Bhagavan 
Visnu) and Hara (Lord Siva). The two brothers (Sri Rama and Laksmana) then called 
on their mother-in-law and having adored her feet and received her blessings they came 
back. Sri Rama and His younger brother Laksmana) took leave of the sages Kausika 
(Visvamitra), Vamadeva and Jabali, the citizens, His own kinsmen and faithful ministers 
with due courtesy and obeisance. The gracious Lord sent back men and women of all 
ranks — high, low and middling — with due honour. (1 — 4) 
With sincere affection the Lord adored the feet of Bharata’s mother (Kaikeyi) and 
embraced her, and having removed all her embarrassment and grief saw her off in a 
palanquin duly equipped for the purpose. (319) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


657 

Chapter 105
Sita, who cherished unalloyed love for Her most beloved lord returned after 
meeting Her kinsmen, father (King Janaka) and mother (Queen Sunayana). Making 
obeisance to Her mothers-in-law She embraced them all; the poet has no enthusiasm 
left in his heart to describe Her affection. Listening to their advice and receiving 
benedictions of Her liking Sita was lost in the love both of Her parents and mothers- 
in-law. The Lord of Raghus sent for the beautiful palanquins and with words of 
consolation He helped all His mothers mount them. The two brothers (Sri Rama and 
Laksmana) embraced them again and again with equal affection and sent them off. 
Equipping the horses, elephants and vehicles of every description the hosts of Bharata 
and King Janaka set out on their journey. With their hearts full of Rama, Sita and 
Laksmana, all the people went on their journey as if in a trance. Even the bullocks, 
horses, elephants and other animals trudged on against their will, sad at heart and 
depressed in spirits. (1 — 4) 
Adoring the feet of the Guru (the sage Vasistha) and the Guru’s wife (Arundhati) 
the Lord as well as Sita and Laksmana returned with a mixed feeling of joy and sorrow 
to their hut of leaves. (320) 
The Nisada chief was courteously sent away and departed; leaving the Lord was 
658 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
a great wrench to him. Pressed to return, the Kolas, Kiratas, Bhilas and other foresters 
returned after bowing again and again. The lord with Sita and Laksmana sat down in the 
shade of a banyan tree and grieved over their separation from their near and dear ones. 
He described to His beloved spouse (Sita) and younger brother (Laksmana) the affection, 
noble disposition and polite speech of Bharata. Overpowered by love Sri Rama extolled 
with His own blessed lips Bharata’s faith and affection in thought, word and deed. At that 
time the birds, beasts and the fish in water, — nay, all the animate and inanimate creatures 
of Citrakuta felt disconsolate. The gods, when they saw the condition of Sri Rama (the 
Chief of Raghus), rained down flowers and told Him what had been going on in their 
homes. The Lord made obeisance and reassured them and they returned, glad of heart, 
without the least fear in their mind. (1 — 4) 
With Sita and His younger brother (Laksmana) the Lord shone forth in His hut of 
leaves. It seemed as if Bhakti (Devotion), Vairagya (Dispassion) and Jnana (Wisdom) had 
appeared in shining forms. (321) 
ther Brahmanas, the Guru (the sage Vasistha), Bharata and 
King Janaka, — the whole host was mentally disturbed on account of their parting with Sri 
Rama. Revolving in their mind the numerous virtues of the lord all wended their way in 
silence. Crossing the Yamuna everyone reached the other bank; the day passed without 
any food. The next halt was made on the other bank of the Gariga (at Srhgaverapura) 
where Sri Rama’s friend (Guha) made all arrangements for their comfort. Ferrying over 
the Sai they bathed in the Gomati and reached Ayodhya on the fourth day. King Janaka 

AYODHYA-KANDA 
659 
stayed in the capital for four days, looked after the state administration as well as all the 
state property and, entrusting the reins of government to the ministers, the Guru (the sage 
Vasistha) and Bharata, he left for Tirahuta (his capital) after making all necessary 
preparations. Following the preceptor’s advice the men and women of the city ensconced 
themselves in Sri Rama’s capital (Ayodhya). (1 — 4) 

Chapter 106
All the people practised religious austerities and fasted in order to be able to see 
Rama again. Discarding all personal adornments and sensuous pleasures they kept their 
lives in the hope of the expiry of exilement. (322) 
Bharata instructed the ministers and trusted servants, who set about their 
respective duties as directed. Then, calling his younger brother (Satrughna), he 
admonished him and entrusted him with the service of all their mothers. Summoning 
the Brahmanas he made obeisance and, joining his palms, prayed to them with due 
courtesy befitting their age: “Pray charge me with any duty — high or low, good or 
indifferent — and hesitate not.” He also sent for his kinsmen, citizens and other people 
and setting their mind at rest established them peacefully. Accompanied by his younger 
brother (Satrughna) he then called on his preceptor and, prostrating himself before him, 
submitted with joined palms, “With your permission I will now live a life of penance.” 
Thrilling over with love the sage replied, ’’Whatever you think, speak or do will be the 
essence of piety in this world.” (1 — 4) 

660 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Hearing this advice and receiving the great blessing (from his preceptor) Bharata 
called astrologers and, fixing an auspicious day (and hour), happily installed on the 
throne of Ayodhya the wooden sandals of the Lord. (323) 
Bowing his head at the feet of Sri Rama’s mother (Kausalya) and his preceptor 
(the sage Vasistha) and receiving the permission of the Lord’s sandals, Bharata, a 
staunch upholder of righteousness, erected a hut of leaves at Nandigrama and took up 
his abode there. Wearing a tuft of a matted locks on his head and clad in hermit’s 
robes, he dug the earth low and spread thereon a litter of Kusa grass. In food, dress, 
utensils, sacred observances and austerities he devoutly practised the rigid vow of 
hermits and professedly discarded, in thought, word and deed, all adornments of body, 
wearing apparel and the many pleasures of the sense. The sovereignty of Ayodhya 
was the envy even of Indra (the lord of celestials), while the very report of the riches 
possessed by Dasaratha put to shame even Kubera (the god of riches); yet in that city 
Bharata dwelt as indifferent as a bee in a garden of Campaka* flowers. The blessed 
souls who are devoted to Sri Rama renounce like vomit the splendour of Laksmi (the 
wealth and enjoyments of the world). (1 — 4) 

‘Even though the Campaka flower is very sweet-scented, the bee, it is alleged, never sucks it. 
AYODHYA-KANDA 
661 

Chapter 107
As for Bharata, he was the beloved of Sri Rama and did not owe his greatness 
to this achievement. The Cataka bird is praised for its constancy and the swan for its 
power of discrimination (sifting milk from water). (324) 
His body grew thinner day by day. His fat was reduced, yet his strength of body 
and the charm of his face remained the same. The flame of his love for Sri Rama was 
ever bright and strong. His partiality for virtue steadily grew and his mind was not at 
all sad, even as with the advent of autumn the water (of lakes and rivers etc.) decreases 
but the rattan plants thrive and the lotus blossoms. Control of the mind and senses, 
self-restraint, religious observances and fasting shone like so many stars in the 
cloudless sky of Bharata’s heart. His faith stood as the pole-star, the prospect of Sri 
Rama’s return on the expiry of His term of exile represented the full-moon night, while 
the thought of his lord glistened like the milky way. And his affection for Sri Rama was 
like a fixed and spotless moon that ever shone clear amidst a galaxy of stars. All great 
poets hesitate to portray the mode of living, the creed, the doings, the devotion, the 
dispassion, the stainless virtues and the splendour of Bharata; they baffle the wits of 
even Sesa (the thousand-headed lord of serpents), Ganesa (the god of wisdom) and 
Sarasvati (the goddess of speech). (1 — 4) 
662 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


He daily worshipped the Lord’s sandals with a heart overflowing with affection and 
constantly referred to them in the disposal of the many affairs of the state. (325) 
His body thrilling all over (with emotion) and heart full of Sita and Sri Rama, his 
tongue repeated Sri Rama’s name and tears flowed from his eyes. Laksmana, Sri Rama 
and Sita dwelt in the forest; while Bharata mortified his flesh through austere penance 
even though living at home. After considering both sides, everyone said that Bharata was 
praiseworthy in everyway. Holy men felt abashed to hear of his religious vows and 
observances and the sight of his condition put the greatest of sages to shame. The most 
sanctifying story of Bharata’s doing is delightful and charming and a fountain of joy and 
blessings. It drives away the terrible sins and afflictions of the Kali age; it is a veritable 
sun to disperse the night of the great delusion (which has thrown us into this world) and 
is a lion (the king of beasts) for crushing the herd of elephants in the shape of sins and 
allays all kinds of sufferings. It delights the devotees, relieves the burden of transmigration 
and is the essence of the moon of devotion to Sri Rama. (1 — 4) 

AYODHYA-KANDA 


663 

Chapter 108
If Bharata, who brimmed over with the nectar of devotion to Sita and Sri Rama, 
had not been born, who would have practised the difficult vow of self-abnegation and 
austerity and control of the mind and senses, that transcended the imagination even of 
sages? Who would have dispelled the woes, burning agony, poverty, hypocrisy and other 
evils of the world through his fair renown; and who in this Kali age would have forcibly 
diverted the mind of villains like Tulasidasa towards Sri Rama? 
Whosoever reverently hear, says Tulasidasa, the story of Bharata with strict 
regularity shall assuredly acquire devotion to the feet of Sita and Rama and a distaste 
for the pleasures of life. (326) 

Thus ends the second descent into the Manasa lake of Sri Rama’s exploits, that eradicates all the 
impurities of the Kali age. 

