
(The Manasa lake containing the exploits of Sri Rama) 

Descent Three 

(Aranya-Kanda) 
Chapter 109
I reverence Bhagavan Sankara, the progeny of Brahma, the very root of the tree 
of piety, the beloved, devotee of King Sri Rama, the full moon that brings joy to the ocean 
of wisdom, the sun that opens the lotus of dispassion, the wind that disperses the clouds 
of ignorance, who dispels the thick darkness of sin and eradicates the threefold agony 
and who wipes off obloquy. (1) 
I worship Sri Rama, the delighter of all, whose graceful form is an embodiment of 
joy and is dark as a rainy cloud, who is clad in a charming yellow bark and carries in 
666 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

His hands a bow and an arrow who has a beautiful, shining and well-equipped quiver 
fastened to His waist and has a pair of large lotus eyes, who is adorned with a tuft of 
matted locks on His head and who is seen journeying with Sita and Laksmana. (2) 
Sri Rama’s virtues, Uma (Parvati ), are mysterious. The sages as well as learned 
men develop dispassion (when they appreciate them ); while the deluded fools who are 
hostile to Sri Hari and have no love for piety get bewildered to hear of them. 
I have portrayed to the best of my ability the incomparable and charming affection 
( for Sri Rama ) of the citizens (of Ayodhya ) as well as of Bharata. Now hear of the all-holy 
exploits of the Lord, that He wrought in the forest to the delight of gods, men and sages. On 
one occasion Sri Rama culled lovely flowers and made with His own hands a number of 
ornaments, with which He fondly decked Sita and sat with Her on a beautiful rock of 
crystal. The foolish son of Indra ( the lord of celestials ) took the form of a crow and wanted 
to test the might of Sri Rama ( the Lord of Raghus ) even as the most dull-witted ant would 
sound the depths of the ocean. The stupid fool, who had disguised himself as a crow with a 
sinister motive, bit Sita in the foot with his beak and flew away. The Lord of Raghus came to 
know it only when blood ran from Her foot, and fitted a shaft of reed to His bow. (1 — 4) 
* ARANYA-KANDA * 667 

The Lord of Raghus is extremely compassionate and is always fond of the meek. 
But the mischievous fool came and played a trick even with Him. (1) 
Winged with a spell, the shaft presided over by Brahma* sped forth and the crow 
in terror took to flight. Indra’s son now assumed his own form and approached his father. 

* Our scriptures mention a number of missiles each presided over by a particular deity and varying in 
its potency according to the god by whom it is presided over and which can be invoked on any earthly weapon 
by means of spells. For instance we hear of an Agni-Astra ( presided over by the fire-god ),a Vayavyastra 
(presided over by the wind-god), Parjanyastra (presided over by the rain-god). Pasupatastra (presided over 
by Lord Siva ) and Narayanastra (presided over by Bhagavan Narayana ) and so on. The Agni-Astra, when 
discharged, rains volleys of fire; the Vayavyastra lets loose strong winds; the Parjanyastra releases clouds 
with showers and so on. It is unfortunate that the knowledge of this science, which was evidenced till the end 
of Dvapara, has become extinct now.

668 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 110
But the latter refused to give him shelter knowing him to be an enemy of Sri Rama. Having 
lost hope ( of protection ) he felt as alarmed at heart as the sage Durvasa was afraid of the 
Lord’s Discus. Weary and stricken with fear and grief, he traversed the abode of Brahma, 
the realm of Lord Siva and all other regions. But no one even asked him to sit down. Who 
can dare afford shelter to an enemy of Sri Rama ? Listen, Garuda (mount of Sri Hari ), a 
mother becomes as terrible as death and a father assumes the role of Yama ( the god of 
death), ambrosia turns into venom and a friend becomes as hostile as a hundred enemies, 
the celestial river ( Gariga ) is converted into the Vaitarani* nay the whole world becomes 
hotter than fire to him who is inimical to Sri Rama. The sage Narada saw Jayanta (Indra’s 
son ) in distress and was moved with pity; for saints are always tender of heart. The sage 
sent him immediately to Sri Rama and he cried out, “Save me, O friend of the suppliant !” 
Bewildered and terrified he went and clasped His feet and said, “Mercy ! mercy ! O 
gracious Lord of Raghus. I could not perceive Your incomparable might and matchless 
glory, dull-witted as I am. I have reaped the fruit born by my own actions and have now 
sought refuge in You. Protect me, my Lord!” When the all-merciful Lord heard his most 
piteous appeal, He let him go with the loss of one eye, O Parvati. (1 — 7) 
Out of folly Jayanta had committed offence against the Lord and therefore deserved 
death, the latter took compassion on him and let him go. Who is there so merciful as the 
Hero of Raghu’s line ? (2) 
* The name of a river in hell, which the dead have to cross before entering the infernal regions. It is 
represented as a filthy stream full of blood, hair and bones and every other kind of impurity. It can be crossed 
only with the help of a cow that may have been gifted by the deceased during his life-time. 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 
669 

Chapter 111
Staying at Citrakuta the Lord of Raghus performed exploits of many kinds, which 
are sweet to the ear as nectar. Sri Rama then thought to Himself, “People will throng here 
now that everyone has come to know me.” Taking leave of all the hermits, therefore, the 
two brothers ( Sri Rama and Laksmana ) left the place with Sita. When the Lord repaired 
to Atri’s hermitage, the great sage was rejoiced at the news. Thrilling all over ( with joy) 
Atri sprang up and ran to meet Him; and seeing him come Sri Rama too advanced 
hurriedly towards him. Even as the two brothers prostrated themselves the sage lifted 
them, and clasping them to his bosom bathed them with tears of love. His eyes were 
gladdened by the sight of Sri Rama’s beauty and then he reverently escorted them to his 
hermitage. Paying his homage to the Lord he spoke kind words to Him and offered Him 
roots and fruits, which He relished much. (1 — 4) 
As the Lord took His seat Atri (the chief of sages), supremely wise as he was, 
feasted his eyes on His loveliness, and joining his palms proceeded to extol Him — (3) 

670 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “I reverence You, who are so fond of Your devotees, compassionate and gentle 
of disposition. I adore Your lotus feet, which vouchsafe to Your selfless lovers a quarter 
in Your own abode. You are possessed of an exquisitely beautiful swarthy form; You are 
Mount Mandara as it were, to churn the ocean of mundane existence;You have eyes like 
the full-blown lotus and rid Your votaries of pride and other vices. Immense is the might 
of Your long arms and immeasurable Your glory. You carry on Your person a quiver, a 

* ARANYA-KANDA * 671 

bow and an arrow, O Lord of the three worlds ! The ornament of the solar race, You broke 
the bow of the great Lord Siva. Delighting the greatest sages and saints, You crush the 
host of demons ( the enemies of gods ). You are an object of reverence to Lord Siva, 
and are adored by Brahma and other divinities. An embodiment of pure consciousness, 
You destroy all evils. I bow to Laksmi’s lord, the fountain of joy and the salvation of 
saints. I adore You with Your Spouse (Sita) and younger brother (Laksmana), Yourself 
a beloved younger Brother* of Indra ( Sachi’s lord). Men who worship the sole of Your 
feet and are free from jealousy, sink not into the ocean of metempsychosis, turbulent with 
the billows of wrangling. They who, living in seclusion, constantly worship You with their 
senses and mind etc., fully subdued for the sake of attaining liberation are able to realize 
their own self. I adore Him, the mysterious Lord, who is one (without a second), 
desireless, all-powerful and omnipresent, the teacher of the world, eternal, transcending 
the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and absolute (self-existent). I adore Him 
who is fond of devotion, who is most difficult of access to sensually-minded strivers but 
who is a wish-yielding tree to His own devotees, nay, who is impartial and so easy to 
worship from day to day. I bow to Sita’s lord, King Rama of matchless beauty. I 
reverence You; be gracious to me and grant me devotion to Your lotus feet. Men who 
recite this hymn with reverence undoubtedly attain Your abode, acquiring devotion to 
Your feet at the same time.” (1 — 12) 
Having prayed thus the sage bowed his head, and joining his palms spoke again: 
“My mind, O Lord, may never abandon Your lotus feet.” (4) 

* The Lord is here identified with Bhagavan Vamana ( the divine Dwarf), who was born of Aditi 
( Kasyapa’s wife) as a younger brother of Indra. 

672 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 112
Then Sita, who was so good-natured and modest, met Anasuya ( Atri’s wife ) 
and clasped her feet. The sage’s wife felt extremely pleased at heart; she blessed 
Her and seating Her by her side arrayed Her in heavenly robes and ornaments that 
remained ever new, clean and charming. In affectionate and mild tones the holy lady 
then proceeded to discourse on some wifely virtues, making Her an occasion for 
such discourse: “ Listen, O Princess: a mother, father and brother are all kind; but they 
bestow only limited joy. A husband, however, bestows unlimited joy (in the form 
of blessedness), O Videha’s daughter; vile is the woman who refuses to serve him. 
Fortitude, piety a friend and a wife — these four are put to the test only in times of 
adversity. A woman who treats her husband with disrespect — even though he is old, 
sick, dull-headed, indigent, blind, deaf, wrathful or most wretched — shall suffer various 
torments in hell (the abode of Yama). Devotion of body, speech and mind to her 
lord’s feet is the only duty, sacred vow and penance of a woman. There are four types 
of faithful wives in this world: so declare the Vedas, the Puranas and all the saints. A 
woman of the best type is convinced in her heart of hearts that she cannot even dream 
in this world of a man other than her lord. The middling regards another’s husband as 
her own brother, father or son ( according to his age). She who is restrained by 
considerations of virtue or by the thought of her race is declared by the Vedas as a low 
* ARANYA-KANDA* 673 

woman. And know her to be the lowest woman in this world, who is restrained only by 
fear and want of opportunity. The woman who deceives her husband and loves a 
paramour is cast for a hundred cycles into the worst form of hell known by the name of 
Raurava. Who is so depraved as the woman who for the sake of a moment’s pleasure 
reckons not the torment that shall endure for a thousand million births! The woman 
who sincerely takes a vow of fidelity to her husband easily attains the highest state; while 
she who is disloyal to her lord is widowed as soon as she attains her youth wherever 
she may be reborn. (1 — 10) 
A woman is impure by her very birth; but she attains a happy state (hereafter) by 
nature serving her lord. (It is due to her loyalty to her husband that) Tulasi is loved by 
Sri Hari even to this day and her glory is sung by all the four Vedas. Listen, Slta: women 
will maintain their vow of fidelity to their husband by invoking your very name, Sri Rama 
being dear to you as your own life. It is for the good of the world that I have spoken to 
you on the subject.” (5 A-B) 


674 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Janaka’s Daughter (Sita) was overjoyed to hear this discourse and reverently 
bowed Her head at the feet of Anasuya. The All-merciful then said to the sage, “With your 
permission I would go to some other forest. Continue to shower your grace on me; and 
knowing me to be your servant never cease loving me.” Hearing these words of the Lord, 
who was a champion of virtue the enlightened sage lovingly replied, “You are the same 
Rama ( the supreme Deity), the beloved of the desireless and the friend of the meek, 
whose favour is sought by Brahma (the Unborn), Lord Siva, the sage Sanaka and all 
other preachers (knowers) of the highest Reality; and yet you are addressing such polite 
words to me. I now understand the wisdom of Sri (Goddess Laksmi), who chose You 
(as Her Lord) to the exclusion of all other gods. How can He who is unequalled and 
unsurpassed by anyone else be less amiable than He is! How can I say, “You may go 
now, my lord? Tell me, my master, knowing as You do, the hearts of all.” Having spoken 
thus the sage kept gazing on the Lord, thrilling all over with emotion and his eyes flowing 
with tears. (1 — 5) 
Thrilling all over with the excess of love, the sage rivetted his eyes on the Lord’s lotus 
face. He thought to himself, ’’What prayers did I mutter and what austerity did I perform that 
I was enabled to behold with my own eyes the Lord who is beyond all knowledge and 
transcends the three Gunas as well as the senses and mind. It is through Japa (muttering 
of prayers). Yoga (concentration of mind) and a host of religious observances that man 
acquires devotion, which is incomparable ( as a means of God-Realization). So does 
TulasTdasa sing the all-holy exploits of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) day and night. 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 675 
The praises of Sri Rama destroy the impurities of the Kali age, subdue the mind 
and are a source of delight. Sri Rama remains ever propitious to those who listen to them 
with reverence. This terrible age (of Kali) is a repertory of sins; piety, spiritual wisdom, 
Yoga or Japa are out of place in this age. They alone, are wise, who worship Sri Rama 
giving up all other hopes. (6A-B) 

Chapter 113
Bowing His head at the lotus feet of the sage, Sri Rama, the Lord of celestials, 
human beings and sages, proceeded to the woods. Sri Rama walked foremost, while 
Laksmana followed Him in the rear, both appearing most lovely in the garb of hermits. 
Between the two Sita (who was the same as Sri, the Goddess of Prosperity) shone forth 
like Maya, which stands between Brahma (the Absolute) and the Jiva (the individual 
soul). Rivers and thickets, hills and rugged valleys recognized their Lord and gave Him 
a smooth passage. Wherever the divine Lord of Raghus passed the clouds made a 
canopy in the heavens, Even as the trio wended their way the demon Viradha met them; 
and the Hero of Raghu’s line sleye him as soon as he made his appearance. (Meeting 
his death at the hands of the Lord), he immediately attained a beauteous (divine) form; 
finding him lead a miserable existence the Lord sent him to His own abode, Accompanied 
by His lovely younger brother (Laksmana) and Janaka’s Daughter (Sita) the Lord then 
visited the sage Sarabhahga. (1 — 4) 

676 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Gazing on Sri Rama’s lotus face the eyes of the great sage reverently drank in its 
beauty like bees. Blessed indeed was the birth of Sarabhahga! (7) 

Said the sage, ’’Listen, gracious Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line), the swan 
disporting in the Manasa lake of Lord Siva’s heart; I was about to leave for Brahma’s 
abode when the report reached my ears that Sri Rama (Yourself) was coming to the 
forest. I have ever since watched the road day and night. My heart is now soothed at 
the sight of my lord. I have accomplished nothing (to deserve Your grace); yet You have 
shown Your grace to me knowing me to be Your humble servant. Really speaking, 
however, You have done me no favour, my lord; You have only redeemed Your vow, O 
Stealer of Your devotees’ hearts! For the sake of this humble servant remain here 
(before my eyes) till I have quitted this body and meet You ( in Your own abode).” So 
saying the sage offered to the Lord whatever practice of Yoga, sacrifices, Japa 
(muttering of prayers), penance and fasting he had done, and received in return the boon 
of Devotion. Having thus acquired the rare gift of Devotion the sage Sarabhahga 
prepared a funeral pile and discarding all attachment from his heart ascended it. (1 — 4) 

“Constantly abide in my heart, O Lord, with Slta and your younger brother (Laksmana) 
in Your qualified and embodied form swarthy as a dark cloud, O graceful Rama!” (8) 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 677 

Chapter 114
Having said so he burnt his body with the fire of Yoga* and by the grace of Sri 
Rama rose to Vaikuntha. The sage was not absorbed into the person of Sri Hari for this 
simple reason that he had already received the boon of personal devotion. The multitude 
of sages (assembled on the occasion) who saw the high state to which the great sage 
had now been translated were greatly delighted at heart. All the hosts of sages now 
extolled the Lord, “Glory to the friend of the suppliant, the fountain of mercy.” Then the 
Lord of Raghus went on further into the forest and many a host of great sage 
accompanied Him. Seeing a heap of bones the Lord of Raghus was moved with great 
compassion and enquired the hermits about the same. “Though knowing everything, how 
is it that You ask us, our master? We know You are all-seeing and can read the innermost 
feelings of all. Hosts of demons have devoured all the sages.” The eyes of Sri Rama (the 
Hero of Raghu’s race) filled with tears when He heard this. (1 — 4) 
With uplifted arms He took a vow to rid the earth of demons. Then He gladdened 
all the hermits by visiting their hermitages one by one. (9) 
Fire produced by Yogis through the friction of the vital airs within the body. 

678 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
* ARANYA-KANDA* 679 
Chapter 115
The sage Agastya had a learned disciple, Sutiksna by name, who was a great lover 
of the Lord. He was devoted to Sri Rama’s feet in thought, word and deed and had no faith 
in any other deity even in dream. As soon as the news of the Lord’s approach reached his 
ears he rushed out hurriedly, indulging in his own fancy: “Will the Lord of Raghus, the 
befriender of the meek, O good heavens, ever show His grace to a wretch like me? Will 
Lord Sri Rama and His younger brother receive me as their own servant? I have no 
unswerving faith in my heart nor is my mind illumined by the light of devotion, dispassion 
or wisdom. I have no association with saints and practise neither Yoga (concentration of 
mind) nor Japa ( muttering of prayers), nor the ritual. Nor do I claim any steadfast devotion 
to the Lord’s lotus feet. I bank on one characteristic of the all-merciful Lord; He holds the 
devotee dear who depends exclusively on Him. This inspires me with the hope that my 
eyes will be rewarded today by the sight of the Lord’s lotus face, that delivers one from the 
bondage of worldly existence.” The wise was drowned in a flood of love; his condition. O 
Parvati, cannot be described in words. He had no idea of the four quarters, much less of 
the intermediate points of the compass; nor could he make out the track. He did not know 
who he was or whither bound. He would now turn back and then resume his journey in the 
same direction; and now he would dance and sing songs of praise. The sage had been 
gifted with devotion of the nature of intense love and the Lord watched him hiding behind 
a tree. When the Hero of Raghu’s line, who dispels the fear of transmigration, saw the 
sage’s excessive love, He revealed Himself in his heart. The sage sat motionless in the 
middle of the path, his body bristling like a jack-fruit with its hair standing on end. The Lord 
of Raghus thereupon drew near and was delighted at heart to see the state of His devotee. 
Sri Rama tried many ways to rouse the sage; but he would not wake, lost as he was in the 
ecstasy of his vision. Sri Rama then withdrew His kingly guise and manifested His four- 
armed form in the sage’s heart. The sage thereupon started up in great agony, growing as 
restless as a noble serpent that has lost the gem on its head. But seeing before him the 
blissful Rama in His swarthy form with Sita and His younger brother (Laksmana), the great 
and blessed sage was overwhelmed with affection and dropped like a log at His feet. 
Taking him in His long arms the Lord lifted him and with utmost affection pressed him to 
His bosom. While embracing the sage the gracious Lord shone forth like a Tamala tree 
meeting a tree of gold. The sage gazed on Sri Rama’s face standing motionless like a figure 
drawn in a picture. (1 — 12) 
Summoning courage in his heart and clasping His feet again and again the sage 
then conducted the Lord to his hermitage and adorea Him homage in many ways. (10) 


680 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 


681 

Said the sage, “Listen, O Lord, to my prayer: how am I to hymn Your praises? For 
immeasurable is Your glory and scant is my wit, which is as insignificant as the flash of 
a fire-fly before the sun. I constantly glorify Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghus), with a body 
dark as a string of blue lotuses, wearing a crown of matted locks on His head and clad 
in a hermit’s robes, and carrying a bow and arrow in His hands with a quiver fastened 
to His waist. The fire which consumes the thick forest of delusion, the sun that brings 
delight to the lotus-like saints, the lion who kills the herd of elephants in the form of 
demons, the hawk that kills the bird of metempsychosis, may He ever protect us. I extol 
Sri Rama, whose eyes resemble the red lotus, who is elegantly dressed, who is a full 
moon to Sita’s Cakora-like eyes, who is a cygnet disporting in the Manasa lake of Lord 
Siva’s heart and who has a broad chest and long arms. A Garuda to devour the serpent 
of doubt, the queller of despair induced by heated controversy, the uprooter of transmigration, 
the delighter of gods, the embodiment of compassion, may He ever protect us, I sing the 
praises of Sri Rama, the reliever of earth’s burden, who is both with and without 
attributes, who is partial as well as impartial, who transcends knowledge, speech and the 
senses and has no compeer, nay, who is all-pure, all-comprehensive, faultless and 
unlimited. A veritable garden of wish-yielding trees to His devotees, who keeps away 
wrath, greed, pride and lust, who is most urbane in manners and the bridge to cross the 
ocean of mundane existence, may that champion of the solar race ever protect me. 
Matchless in power of arm, the home of strength, the armour for the protection of 
righteousness, endowed with a host of delightful virtues, may that Rama whose very 
Name wipes out the greatest sins of the Kali age, be ever propitious to me. Even though 
He is passionless, all-pervading, imperishable and ever dwelling in the heart of all, let 
Him abide in my thoughts as the Slayer of Khara, roaming about in the woods with His 
younger brother (Laksmana) and Sita. Let alone, my lord, those who know You to be 
both with and without attributes and the witness of all hearts. As for myself may Sri 
Rama, the lotus-eyed Lord of Kosala, take up His abode in my heart. Let not this exalted 
feeling disappear from my mind even in an unguarded moment that I am His servant and 
the Lord of Raghus my master.” Sri Rama was delighted at heart to hear the sage’s 
words, and in His delight He pressed the great sage to His bosom again. “Know Me to 
be supremely pleased, O sage; I am prepared to grant you any boon you may choose 
to ask.” The sage replied, “I have never asked any boon and know not what is real and 
what unreal (what to choose and what to reject). Therefore, O Delighter of Your 
devotees, grant me that which pleases You, O Lord of Raghus.” “May you become a 
repository of worldly wisdom and goodness as well as of intense devotion, dispassion 
and spiritual wisdom.” “I have received the boon that my Lord has been pleased to grant. 




682 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 116

Now vouchsafe to me that which is cherished by me.” (1 — 14) 
 “Armed with a bow and arrow and accompanied by Your younger brother and 
Janaka’s Daughter (Sita), O Lord Sri Rama, pray dwell forever like a moon in the 
firmament of my heart, though free from every desire.” (11) 
“So be it,” said Sri Rama ( the Abode of Laksmi) as He joyously started on His 
visit to the jar-born sage, Agastya. “ It is a long time since I last saw my Guru and came 
to live in this hermitage. Now, my lord, I will go with You to see my Guru; thus I am not 
putting You under any obligation.” The Fountain of Mercy saw through the sage’s 
cleverness and both the brothers smiled as they took him with them. Discoursing on the 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 683 

way on the incomparable cult of devotion to His own feet Sri Rama (the King of the gods) 
arrived at the hermitage of the sage ( Agastya). Sutiksna immediately saw his Guru and 
after prostrating himself before the latter thus addressed him, “My lord, the two sons of 
King Dasaratha (Kosala’s lord), the support of the world, have come to see you — Sri 
Rama, accompanied by His younger brother (Laksmana) and Videha’s Daughter (Sita), 
whose Name you repeat night and day, venerable sir.” Agastya started up as soon as 
he heard this and ran; at the sight of Sri Hari his eyes filled with tears. The two brothers 
fell at the sage’s lotus feet; and the sage took and clasped them to his bosom with the 
utmost affection. Courteously enquiring after their welfare the enlightened sage conducted 
them to an magnificent seat and then offered worship in various ways to the Lord, saying 
“There is no other man so blessed as I am.” Whatever other sages had assembled there, 
were all delighted to behold the Fountain of Joy. (1 — 7) 

As He sat in the midst of the assembly of sages with His face turned towards all 
(and their eyes fixed on His moon-like face), they seemed like a bevy of Cakora birds 
gazing on the autumnal moon. (12) 

684 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Then said Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) to the sage, “ I have nothing to hide 
from you, my lord. You know what for I have come; that is why, holy sir, I have not 
dwelt at length on this point. Now, my good sir, give me some advice, by following which 
I may be able to kill the enemies of the hermits.” The sage smiled when he heard the 
Lord’s remarks. “With what intention have You asked me this question? It is by virtue of 
my devotion to You, O Destroyer of sins, that I know a bit of Your glory. Your Maya 
(Creative potency) is like a huge tree of the species known by the name of Udumbara, 
with the countless multitudes of universes for its clustering fruits. The animate and 
inanimate beings (inhabiting the various universes) are like the insects that dwell inside 
the fruits and know of no other thing fruit (besides the one they inhabit ). The relentless 
and dreadful Time-spirit devours these fruits; but even that (all-devouring) Time ever 
trembles in fear of You. You, who are the suzerain lord of all the regional lords, have 
asked my advice as though You were an ordinary human being. I ask this boon of You, 
O Home of mercy: pray, dwell in my heart with Your Spouse (Sita) and younger brother 
(Laksmana) and let me have intense devotion, dispassion, fellowship with the saints and 
unbroken love for Your lotus feet. Even though I know You to be the same as the 
indivisible and infinite Brahma (the Absolute), who can only be realized ( and cannot be 
known by any other means) and is adored by the saints, and even though I depict You 
as such, I feel enamoured of Your qualified form again and again. You have always 
exalted Your servants; that is why You have thought fit to consult me, O Lord of Raghus. 
There is, my lord, a most charming and holy spot; it is called Pancavati. Sanctify the 
Dandaka forest (where it is situated) and redeem it from the terrible curse of the great 
sage (Sukracarya). Take up Your abode there, O Lord of Raghu’s line, and show Your 
grace to all the sages.” On receiving the sage’s permission Sri Rama departed and drew 
near to Pancavati in a short while. (1 — 9) 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 685 


He met Jatayu (the king of vultures); and developing friendship with him in many 
ways the Lord stayed near the Godavari, where He made Himself a thatched hut 
of leaves. (13) 


From the time Sri Rama took up His abode there the sages lived happily and were 
rid of all fear. The hills, woods, streams and lakes were suffused with beauty and grew yet 
more lovely day by day. The birds and deer were full of joy, and the bees with their sweet 
humming looked very charming. Not even Sesa (the king of serpents) would be able to 
describe the forest which was adorned by Sri Rama (the Chief of Raghus ) in His manifest 
form. Once upon a time, as the Lord was sitting at ease, Laksmana addressed Him in 
guileless words: “ O Lord of gods, human beings, sages and all animate and inanimate 
creation! I ask of You as of my own master. Instruct me, my lord, how I may be able to 
adore the dust of Your feet to the exclusion of everything else. Discourse to me on spiritual 
wisdom and dispassion as well as on Maya (Illusion); and also speak to me about Bhakti 
due to which you shower Your grace.” (1 — 4) 
 “Also explain to me all the difference between God and the individual soul, so 
that I may be devoted to Your feet and my sorrow, infatuation and delusion may 
disappear.” (14) 

686 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“I will explain everything in a nutshell; listen, dear brother, with your mind, intellect 
and reason fully absorbed. The feeling of T and ‘mine’ and ‘you’ and ‘yours’ is Maya 
(Illusion), which holds sway over all created beings. Whatever is perceived by the senses 
and that which lies within the reach of the mind, know it all to be Maya. And hear of its 
divisions too: they are two, viz., knowledge and ignorance. The one (ignorance) is vile and 
extremely painful, and has cast the Jiva into metempsychosis.The other (knowledge), which 
brings forth the creation and which holds sway over the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas) is directed by the Lord and has no strength of its own. Spiritual wisdom is that which 
is free from all blemishes in the shape of pride* etc., and which sees the Supreme Spirit 
equally in all. He alone, dear brother, should be called a man of supreme dispassion, who 
has spurned all supernatural powers as well as the three Gunas (of which the universe is 
composed) as if of no more account than a blade of grass.” (1 — 4) 
 “That alone deserves to be called a Jiva (individual soul), which knows not Maya 
nor God nor one’s own self. And Siva (God) is He who awards bondage and liberation 
(according to one’s deserts), transcends all and is the motivator of Maya.” (15) 

* Srimad Bhagavada enumerates the following characteristics which make for spiritual wisdom. 
They are: absence of pride, freedom from hypocrisy, non-violence, forgiveness, guilelessness, devout service of one’s preceptor, purity of body and mind, steadfastness, subjugation of the mind, aversion to the objects of sense, absence of egotism, pondering again and again on the painful character of and the evils inherent in birth, death, old age and disease; absence of attachment and the feeling of mineness in respect of one’s son, wife, home, etc., and constant equipoise of mind both in favourable and unfavourable circumstances; unflinching devotion to the Lord through exclusive attachment living in secluded and holy places and finding no enjoyment in the company of men; fixity in self-knowledge and seeing God as the object of true knowledge (vide XIII.7-11). The definition given here narrates the opposites of these virtues, viz., pride, hypocrisy, 
violence and so on. The definition may be interpreted in a different way as well. It may be taken to mean that spiritual wisdom cannot be attained through the ordinary means of cognition (Manasa or Pramanas) such as perception, inference, verbal testimony and so on; it is self-evident (W: wop. 

* ARANYA-KANDA * 687 


“Dispassion results from the practice of virtue, while spiritual wisdom comes of 
the practice of Yoga (concentration of mind); and wisdom is the bestower of liberation: 
so declare the Vedas. And that which melts My heart quickly, dear brother, is Devotion, 
which is the delight of My devotees. It stands by itself and requires no other prop; 
whereas Jnana (knowledge of God in His absolute formless aspect) and Vijnana 
(knowledge of the qualified aspect of God, both with and without form) depend on it. 
Devotion, dear brother, is incomparable and the very root of bliss; it can be acquired only 
by the favour of saints. I now proceed to tell you at some length the means of acquiring 
Devotion, an easy path by which men find Me. In the first place a man should cultivate 
excessive devotion to the feet of the Brahmanas and secondly he should remain engaged 
in his own duty according to the lines laid down by the Vedas. This induces an aversion to 
the pleasures of sense and dispassion in its turn engenders a love for My Cult (the Cult 
of Devotion). This will bring steadfastness in the nine forms of Devotion* such as Sravana 
(hearing of the Lord’s praises etc.,) and the mind will develop an excessive fondness for 
My sports. Again, one should be extremely devoted to the lotus feet of saints and should 
be persistent in the practice of adoration through mind, speech and action. He should 

* The nine forms of Devotion as enumerated in SrTmad Bhagavata are: (1) Sravana (hearing of 
the Lord’s praises and stories), (2) KTrtana (chanting His Name, praises and stories), (3) Smarana (fixing 
one’s thought on Him), (4) Padasevana (adoring His feet); (5) Arcana (worshipping an image of the Lord), 
(6) Vandana (making obeisance to Him), (7) Dasya (offering devout service to the Lord), (8) Sakhya 
(cultivating friendship with Him) and (9) Atmanivedana (offering oneself to the Lord). 


688 

recognize Me as his preceptor, father, mother, kinsman, lord, deity and all and should be 
steadfast in My service. A thrill runs through his body as he sings My praises; his voice gets 
choked and his eyes flow with tears; he is free from lust and other vices, pride and 
hypocrisy. I am ever at the beck and call of such a devotee. (1 — 6) 
 “ Nay, I ever repose in the lotus heart of those who depend on Me in thought, word 
and deed and who worship Me in a selfless way.” (16) 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 689 
Laksmana was greatly delighted to hear the above discourse on the discipline of 
Bhakti (Devotion) and bowed his head at the feet of the Lord. In this way some days 
were spent in discoursing on dispassion, spiritual wisdom, goodness and morality. Now 
Ravana (the notorious demon king of Lanka) had a sister, Surpanakha (lit., a woman 
having nails as big as a winnowing fan) by name, who was foul-hearted and cruel as a 
serpent. She once went to Pancavati and was smitten with pangs of love at the sight of 
the two princes. At the very sight of a handsome man, be he her own brother, father or 
son, O Garuda, a (wanton) woman gets excited and cannot restrain her passion, even 
as the sun-stone emits fire when it is brought in front of the sun. Having assumed a 
charming form she approached the Lord and with many a smile addressed the following 
words to Him: “There is no man like you and no woman like me. It is with great 
deliberation that God has made this pair. I have ransacked the three spheres but have 
found no suitable match for me in the whole universe. It is for this reason that I have till 
now remained a virgin; my mind has been set at rest a bit only after seeing you.” The 
Lord cast a glance at Sita and said only this much: “My younger brother is a bachelor.” 
She went to Laksmana, who, knowing that she was their enemy’s sister, looked at his 
lord and spoke in gentle tones: “ Listen, fair lady: I am His servant and a dependant; thus 
you will have no comforts with me. My lord is all-powerful and the sovereign king of 
Kosalapura (Ayodhya); whatever He does will be worthy of Him. A servant who aspires 
for happiness, a beggar who expects honour, a person addicted to some vice who hopes 
for riches, a profligate who seeks a blessed state after death, an avaricious man who 
covets fame and a proud man who expects the four prizes of life — all these men expect 
to get milk by milking the heavens.” “Again she turned and came to Sri Rama; but the 
Lord sent her back to Laksmana. Said Laksmana, “ He alone will wed you, who 
deliberately casts all shame to the winds.” Thereupon she went fretting and foaming to 
Sri Rama and revealed her frightful demoniac form. The Lord of Raghus saw that Sita 
was terrified and made a sign to His younger brother (Laksmana). (1 — 10) 

690 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Without nose and ears she wore a hideous aspect and looked like a mountain 
flowing with torrents of red ochre. She went sobbing to Khara and Dusana: “Fie, fie upon 
your manhood and strength, brothers!” Questioned by them she told them everything in 
detail; hearing her report the demon chiefs gathered an army. Swarming multitudes of 
demons of diverse shapes rushed forth like hosts of winged mountains of collyrium 
on vehicles of various kinds. They were infinite in number and were armed with terrible 
weapons of various kinds. They placed at their head Surpanakha shorn of her ears and 
nose and thus presenting an inauspicious sight. Numberless ill-omens of a fearful nature 
occured to them; but the host heeded them not, doomed as they all were to death. They 
roared and bullied and sprang in the air; and the champions were filled with excessive 
joy to see the army. Said one, “Capture the two brothers alive and having captured them 




* ARANYA-KANDA* 691 

kill them and carry off the woman.” The vault of heaven was overhung with the dust raised 
by them. (Seeing this) Sri Rama called His younger brother (Laksmana) and said,” “Take 
Janaka’s Daughter to some mountain-cave; a terrible array of demons has come. 
Therefore, remain on your guard.” Obedient to his lord’s command he withdrew (to a safe 
retreat) with Sita, bow and arrow in hand. When Sri Rama saw that the hostile force had 
advanced, He smiled as He strung His formidable bow. (1 — 7) 
As He coiled His matted locks into a tuft on His head after stringing His formidable 
bow, it seemed as if a pair of snakes were engaged in a conflict with countless 
streaks of lightning on a mountain of emerald. Having girded up His quiver at His waist, 
and clasping the bow with His long arms and putting His arrows in order, He looked 
at the enemy even as a lion (the king of the beasts) would glare at a herd of large 
elephants. 
Valiant champions came rushing with all speed shouting “ Seize him, seize him!” 
even as the demons* close round upon the rising sun finding it all alone. (18) 

* It is mentioned in our scriptures that a special class of demons known by the name of ‘Mandehas’ 
close round upon the rising sun, weapons in hand, every morning and are driven away by the drops of 
water thrown into the air by way of ‘Arghya’ in course of the ‘Sandhya’ prayer. Thus it is all the more 
necessary that every member of the twice-born classes should perform his Sandhya before sunrise every 
morning without fail. 

692 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Even as they beheld the Lord the invading warriors could not discharge their 
arrows; the whole demon host became powerless. Khara and Dusana summoned their 
ministers and said, “This prince, whoever he may be, is an ornament of the human 
race. Of all the Nagas, demons, gods, human beings and sages that exist (in this 
universe) we have seen, vanquished or slain many. But during our whole life, listen 
to us, our brethren all, we have never beheld such beauty. Even though he has 
disfigured our sister, he does not deserve death, peerless as he is among men. 
‘Surrender to us at once the woman you have put in hiding somewhere and return 
home with your life, both you and your brother.’ Deliver this message of mine to him 
and return immediately with his reply.” The heralds went to Sri Rama and delivered 
the message to Him, in reply to which Sri Rama smilingly said, “We are Ksatriyas 
by birth and are given to hunting in the woods; wretches like you are the game that 
we are tracking. We are never dismayed at the sight of a mighty foe and would give 
battle to Death himself if he ever appeared before us. Though human beings, we are 
the exterminators of the race of demons and, though youthful in appearance, we are 
the protectors of the hermits and the torment of the wicked. If you have no strength 
to fight, you had better return home; I never kill an enemy who has turned his back 
upon the field of battle. When you have come up to fight, it would be the height of 
weakness to play wily pranks or to show compassion to your enemy.” The heralds 
returned forthwith and repeated all that they had been told. The heart of Khara and 
Dusana was on fire when they heard it. (1 — 7) 




* ARANYA-KANDA* 693 
Their heart was on fire and they exclaimed, “Capture him,” hearing which fierce 
demon champions rushed forth, all armed with bows and arrows, steel clubs, pikes, 
spears, scimitars, maces and axes. First of all the Lord gave His bow a twang — shrill, 
terrific and fearful — which deafened and distressed the demons and they had no sense 
left in them at that time. 

Having learnt that they were confronting a powerful enemy, the demon warriors 
now rushed with caution and began to hurl missiles and weapons of various kinds on Sri 
Rama. The Hero of Raghu’s line, however, tore them into pieces as small as sesamum 
seeds and then drawing the bow-string to His ear let fly His own arrows. (19 A-B) 

694 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Then the terrible arrows sped forth, hissing like so many serpents. Sri Rama got 
infuriated in battle and arrows, exceedingly sharp, flew from His bow. The demon 
warriors turned and fled when they found the arrows so very keen. The three brothers 
(Khara, Dusana and Trisira) now flew into rage: “Whoever flees from the battle-field will 
be killed by us with our own hands.” At this the warriors turned back, fully resolved to 
die, and made a frontal attack with weapons of every description. Perceiving that the 
enemy was exceedingly furious, the Lord fitted arrows to His bow and discharged many 
a shaft of the ‘Naraca’ type with the result that frightful fields began to be mowed down. 
Trunks, heads, arms, hands and feet began to drop to the ground here, there and 
everywhere. Pierced by shafts, they yelled and their trunks fell like mountains. The 
bodies of the warriors were torn into a hundred pieces and resorting to deceptive 
methods they stood up again. A number of arms and heads flew through the air and 
headless trunks ran to and fro. Birds like kites and crows and jackals wrangled in a 
cruel and awful way. (1 — 7) 



* ARANYA-KANDA * 695 
Jackals wrangled; ghosts, spirits and fiends filled the bowls of skulls with blood: 
devils clashed the heads of slain warriors like cymbals and the Yoginis* danced. Sri 
Rama’s fierce arrows tore to pieces the leaders’ breast, arms and heads; their bodies 
fell on every side but stood up again to fight with terrible cries of “Seize, capture!” Vultures 
flew away with the end of entrails in their claws, while goblins scampered with the other 
end held in their hands; one might fancy numberless children of the town of the battle- 
field were flying kites. A large number of champions, that had been smitten or knocked 

* A class of female attendants on Lord Siva or Goddess Durga, who are generally believed to be sixty- 
four in number. 




696 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


down or whose breast had been torn, lay moaning. Finding their army in distress leaders 
like Trisira, Khara and Dusana turned towards Sri Rama. Countless demons hurled furiously 
against the Hero of Raghu’s line, arrows, spears, iron clubs, axes, javelins and daggers 
all at once. In the twinkling of an eye the Lord warded off the enemy’s shafts and sent 
forth His own arrows, planting ten shafts in the breast of each champion of the demon 
host. The leaders fell to the ground but rose again and joined in the fray. Yet they would 
not die and played very many tricks. The gods trembled with fear when they saw that the 
demons numbered fourteen thousand, while the Lord of Ayodhya was all alone. Finding 
the gods and sages alarmed, the Lord, who is the Controller of Maya (Cosmic Illusion), 
wrought a great miracle. The demons saw one another in the form of Sri Rama, so that 
the enemy’s warriors fought among themselves and perished. (1 — 4) 

They quitted their body crying “Rama! Rama!!” and thereby attained the state of 
eternal bliss. Falling back upon this device the Ocean of Mercy killed the enemy in an 
instant. The gods in their exultation rained down flowers and kettle-drums sounded in the 
heavens. And hymning their praises one after another they all left, shining in their cars 
of various patterns. (20 A-B) 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 


697 

 

When the Lord of Raghus had vanquished the foe in battle, the gods, human 
beings and sages were all rid of fear. Then Laksmana brought Sita back; and as he fell 
at His feet the Lord joyously clasped him to His bosom. Sita fixed Her gaze on His 
swarthy and delicate form with utmost affection; but Her eyes knew no satiety. Thus 
dwelling at Pancavati the blessed Lord of Raghus performed deeds that delighted gods 
and sages alike. Perceiving the destruction of Khara and Dusana, Surpanakha approached 
Ravana and instigated him (against Sri Rama). In great fury she rated him in the 
following words: “Discarding all thought of your realm and exchequer you drink and sleep 
day and night and take no heed of the enemy, who is now at your very door. Sovereignty 
without political insight, wealth divorced from virtue, noble deeds that have not been 
offered to Sri Hari (God) and learning which does not beget discrimination is nothing but 
fruitless labour to the man who has gained such kingdom or wealth, to the doer of the 
noble acts and to the student respectively. A recluse is quickly undone by attachment, 
a king by evil counsel, wisdom by conceit, modesty by drinking, friendship by want of love, 
and man of merit by vanity: such is the maxim I have heard. (1 — 6) 
 “An enemy, a malady, fire, sin, a master, and a serpent are never to be accounted 
trifles.” So saying and with profuse laments she set to weeping. In her distress she threw 
herself down in Ravana’s court and with many a tear said, “ Do you think, my ten-headed 
brother, that I should be reduced to this state even though you are alive?” (21A-B) 

698 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 117
On hearing this the courtiers rose in great bewilderment; taking her by the arm 
they lifted her up and comforted her. Said the king of Lanka, “Tell me what has happened 
to you. Who has struck off your nose and ears?” “Two sons of Dasaratha, the lord of 
Ayodhya, who are lions among men, are out for hunting in the woods. The estimate that 
I have formed of their doing is that they will rid the earth of demons. Relying on the might 
of their arm, O ten-headed Ravana, the hermits roam about the woods without fear. 
Though quite young to look at, they are terrible as Death, the staunchest of archers and 
accomplished in many ways. Both brothers are unequalled in might and glory; devoted 
to the extermination of the wicked, they are a source of delight to gods and sages. The 
elder of the two who is an abode of beauty, is known by the name of Rama; he has with 
him a young belle. The Creator made that woman the very embodiment of loveliness; a 
hundred million Ratis (consort of the god of love) are trifles before her. It was his 
younger brother (Laksmana) who chopped off my ears and nose and made a mock of 
me when he heard that I was your sister. When Khara and Dusana heard of it, they went 
to avenge the wrong done to me; but Rama slew the whole army in a trice!” The ten- 
headed demon (Ravana) burned all over (with rage) when he heard of the destruction of 
Khara, Dusana and Trisira. (1 — 6) 
Having consoled Surpanakha he boasted of his strength in many ways; but he 
retired to his palace full of great anxiety and could not sleep the whole night. (22) 
* ARANYA-KANDA* 699 
 “Among gods, human beings, demons, Nagas and birds,” he thought, “there is none 
who can withstand my servants. As for Khara and Dusana, they were as powerful as 
myself; who else could have killed them, had it not been the Lord Himself? If therefore 
the Lord Himself, the Delighter of the gods and the Reliever of Earth’s burden, has 
appeared on earth, I will go and resolutely fight with him and cross the ocean of mundane 
existence by falling to His arrows. Adoration is out of question in this (demoniac) body, 
which is made up of the principle of ignorance, (Tamasa). Therefore, such is my firm resolve 
in thought, word and deed. And if they happen to be some mortal princes I shall conquer 
them both in battle and carry off the bride.” Having thus made up his mind, he mounted 
his chariot and drove off alone to the spot where Marlca was living by the sea-shore. Now, 
hear, Uma, the delectable account of the device that Sri Rama employed. (1 — 4) 

When Laksmana had gone to the woods to gather roots, fruits and bulbs, Sri 
Rama, the very encarnation of compassion and joy, spoke with a smile to Janaka’s 
Daughter:— (23) 



700 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“Listen, my darling, who have been staunch in the holy vow of fidelity to me and 
are so virtuous in conduct: I am going to act a lovely human part. Abide in fire until I have 
completed the destruction of the demons.” No sooner had Sri Rama told Her everything 
in detail than She impressed the image of the Lord’s feet on Her heart and entered into 
the fire, leaving with Him only of a shadow of Hers, though precisely of the same 
appearance and the same amiable and gentle disposition. Laksmana too did not know 
the secret of what the Lord had done behind the curtain. The ten-headed Ravana 
approached Marica and bowed his head to him, selfish and vile as he was. The 
meekness of a mean creature is a source of great trouble like the bending of a goad, 
bow, snake or cat. The sugar cooted speech of a villain is as alarming, Bhavani (ParvatT), 
as the flowers that blossom out of season. (1 — 4) 
After doing him homage Marica respectfully enquired of him his errand: “Wherefore, 
my son, are you so much disturbed in mind that you have come all the way alone?”(24) 


* ARANYA-KANDA* 


701 
The wretched Ravana proudly repeated the whole story to him and added,” “Assume 
the false appearance of a wily deer, so that I may be able to abduct the princess.” Marica, 
however, remonstrated, “Listen, Ravana: though disguised as a man, He is the lord of the 
whole animate and inanimate creation. There can be no quarrel with Him, dear son; we die 
when He would have us die and live only by His sufferance. Those very princes had gone 
to guard the sacrifice of the sage Vlsvamitra, when Sri Rama (the Lord of Raghus) smote 
me with a pointless arrow, that threw me at a distance of 800 miles in an instant. It will 
not be good to antagonize them. I find myself reduced to the position of an insect* caught 
in the nest of a Bhrhga ( a wasp-like winged creature) inasmuch as I behold the two brothers 
wherever I look. Even if they are human beings, dear son, they are remarkable heroes 
nonetheless; and opposition to them will not avail. (1 — 4) 

“But can he possibly be a man, who recklessly killed Tadaka and Subahu, broke 
Siva’s bow and slew Khara, Dusana and Trisira ?” (25) 
* It is a matter of common observation that the Bhrhga catches hold of any insect whatsoever and 
confining it in its nest of mud hums incessantly before it with the result that the insect is enamoured of the 
Bhrhga and is eventually transformed into a Bhrhga. 

702 

Chapter 115

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Therefore, considering the welfare of your race you had better return home.” 
When he heard this he flared up and showered many abuses on Marica. “You fool, 
you presume to teach me as if you were my preceptor. Tell me which warrior in this 
world is a match for me.” Then Marica thought to himself, “It does not do one good to 
make enemies of the following nine, viz., one skilled in the use of a weapon, he 
who knows one’s secret, a powerful master, a dunce, a wealthy man, a physician, a 
panegyrist, a poet, an expert cook.” Either way he saw he must die: hence he sought 
refuge in the Lord of Raghus. “If I argue further, the wretch would kill me; why, then, 
should I not be killed by Sri Rama’s arrows?” Pondering thus in his mind he accompanied 
Ravan, unremitting in his devotion to Sri Rama’s feet. He felt extremely delighted at the 
thought that he would be able to behold his greatest friend (Sri Rama), even though he 
would not reveal his joy to Ravana. (1 — 4) 

“My eyes will be rewarded when I behold my most beloved lord to my great 
exultation and I shall fix my thoughts on the feet of the All-merciful accompanied by Sita 
and His younger brother. To think that Sri Hari, the Ocean of Bliss, whose very wrath 
confers final beatitude and who, though subject to none gives Himself up entirely to the 
will of His devotees, will fit an arrow with His own hands to His bow and slay me!” 

 “As He runs after me on foot, carrying His bow and arrow, I shall again and again 
turn in order to get a sight of my lord ! No one else is so blessed as I am.” (26) 


Chapter 119

* ARANYA-KANDA* 703 
When the ten-headed Ravana drew near to the forest (in which Sri Rama had 
taken up His abode), Marica assumed the false appearance of a deer, so very wonderful 
as to defy description, with a body of gold artistically inlaid with jewels. When Sita saw 
the exquisitely beautiful creature, most lovely in every limb, She said, “ Listen, my 
gracious Lord Sri Rama (Hero of Raghu’s line), this deer has a most charming skin. Pray 
kill this animal, my lord, and get me the hide, true as you are to your word.” Thereupon 
the Lord of Raghus, even though He knew all the circumstances (that had led Marica to 
assume the semblance of a deer) arose with joy to accomplish the object of the gods. 
Casting a look at the deer He girded up His loins with a piece of cloth and taking the 
bow in His hand fitted a shining arrow to the same. The Lord cautioned Laksmana: “ A 
host of demons, brother, roam about in the woods. Take care of Sita with due regard to 
your strength and circumstances and making use of your intellect and discretion.” The 
deer took to flight at the sight of the Lord and Sri Rama ran after it pulling His bow-string. 
How strange that He whom the Vedas describe in negative terms such a ‘not that’ and 

704 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
whom Siva is unable to catch hold of even in meditation, ran in pursuit of a false deer! 
Now close at hand. The very next moment it ran away to some distance; at one time it 
came into view, at another it went out of sight. Thus alternately revealing and concealing 
itself and practising every kind of wile, it took the Lord far away. Now Sri Rama took 
a steady aim and let fly the fatal shaft, when the animal fell to the ground with a fearful 
cry, first calling aloud to Laksmana but afterwards mentally invoking Sri Rama. While 
giving up the ghost it manifested its real form and lovingly remembered Sri Rama. The 
omniscient Lord, who could see the love of his heart, conferred on him the state which 
cannot be easily attained to even by the sages. (1 — 9) 
The gods rained down flowers in abundance and sang praises of the Lord: “The 
Lord of Raghus is such a friend of the humble that He conferred His own state (divinity) 
on a demon.” (27) 


* ARANYA-KANDA* 


705 
As soon as He had slain the wretch the Hero of Raghu’s line turned back, the 
charming bow in his hand and the quiver at His waist. When Sita heard the cry of 
distress, She was seized with excessive fear and said to Laksmana, “Go quickly, your 
brother is in great peril.” Laksmana answered with a smile, “ Listen, mother! By the very 
play of Sri Rama’s eyebrows the entire creation is annihilated; could He then everle 
dreamed of being in danger?” But when Slta urged him with words that cut him to the 
quick, Laksmana’s resolution — for such was Sri Hari’s will — was shaken, He entrusted Her 
to the care of all the sylvan gods and the deities presiding over the quarters and 
proceeded to the place where Sri Rama, a veritable Rahu to the moonlike Ravana, was. 
Availing himself of this opportunity, when there was none by the side of Slta, the ten- 
headed Ravana drew near to Her cottage in the guise of a recluse. He, in fear of whom 
the gods and demons equally trembled, so much so that they could neither sleep by night 
nor eat their food by day — that very Ravana proceeded on his mission of thieving looking 
this side and that like a cur. Even so the moment a man sets his foot on the path of vice, 
O Garuda (king of birds), his bodily glow, reason and strength completely disappear. 
Having invented alluring stories of various kinds he not only showed Her the course 
which was dictated by political wisdom but also used threats and made love to Her. Said 
Sita, “Listen, O holy father: you have spoken like a villain.” Then Ravana revealed his 
real form; and She was terrified when he mentioned his name. Sita plucked all Her 
courage and said, “ Stay awhile, O wretch; my lord has come. Even as a tiny hare would 
wed a lioness, so have you wooed your own destruction (by setting your heart on me), 
O king of demons.” On hearing these words the ten-headed Ravana flew into a rage, 
though in his heart he rejoiced to adore Her feet. (1 — 8) 

Full of rage, Ravana now seated Her in his chariot and drove through the air in 
great flurry: he was so much afraid that he was scarcely able to drive. (28) 

706 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

707 

“Ah! Lord of Raghus, peerless champion of the world, reliever of distress and 
delighter of the suppliant, ah! the sun that gladdens the lotus-like race of Raghu, for what 
fault of mine you forgat showing mercy? Ah! Laksmana, the fault is none of yours; I have 
reaped the fruit of the temper I showed.” Manifold were the lamentations that Videha’s 
Daughter uttered. “Though boundless his mercy, my loving lord is far away. Who will 
apprize the lord of my calamity? An ass would eat the sacrificial oblation!” At the sound 
of Sita’s loud wailing all created beings, whether animate or inanimate, felt distressed, 
Jatayu (the king of vultures) heard the piteous cry and recognized (from Her voice) that 
it was the spouse of Sri Rama, the Glory of Raghu’s race, who was being carried away 
by the vile demon (Ravana) like a dun cow that had fallen into the hands of some 
barbarian. “Sita, my daughter, fear not; I will kill this demon.” The bird darted off in its 
fury like a thunderbolt hurled against a mountain. “Why do you not stop, O villain ? You 
are proceeding fearlessly as if you have not yet known me!” When he saw the vulture 
bearing down upon him like Death, the ten-headed monster turned towards him and 
reflected, “Is it Mount Mainaka or can it be Garuda (the king of birds) ? The latter, 
however, knows my strength as also his lord (Bhagavan Visnu)!” When the bird drew near, 
he recognized it and said, “ It is no other than the aged Jatayu; he has come to drop 
his body at the sanctuary of my hands.” At this the vulture rushed in the excitement of 
his fury, exclaiming: “ Listen, Ravana, to my advice and return home safely, letting 
Janaka’s Daughter alone. Otherwise despite your many arms what will happen is this: in 
the most terrible flame of Sri Rama’s wrath your whole house will be consumed like a 
moth.” Bellicose Ravana, however gave no answer. The vulture (Jatayu) thereupon 
rushed wildly on and clutching the demon by his hair pulled him from the chariot so that 
he fell to the ground. Having placed Sita in a safe retreat, the vulture turned once more 
towards Ravana and striking him with his beak tore his body. For nearly half an hour 
Ravana lay unconscious. Much annoyed at this the demon now angrily drew his most 
dreadful sword and cut off Jatayu’s wings. Invoking Sri Rama and having accomplished 
marvellous feats, the bird fell to the ground. Ravana took Sita once more into his car and 
drove off in haste, greatly alarmed. Sita was borne through the air lamenting like a 
frightened doe caught in the trap of a hunter. Perceiving some monkeys perched on a 
hill She dropped some cloth uttering Sri Hari’s name. In this manner Ravana took Sita 
away and kept Her in the Asoka garden. (1 — 13) 

708 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The wretch tried every kind of threat and endearment but failed miserably. At last 
he kept Her under an Asoka tree strongly guarded. (29 A) 
Having impressed on Her heart the beautiful image of Sri Rama as He appeared while 
running in pursuit of the false deer, Sita incessantly repeated Sri Hari’s Name. (29 B) 


* ARANYA-KANDA* 


709 
When the Lord of Raghus saw His younger brother coming, He outwardly 
expressed much concern. “Alas! You have left Janaka’s daughter alone and come here 
against my instructions. Hosts of demons are roaming about in the forest; I, therefore, 
suspect Sita is not at the hermitage.” Laksmana clasped Sri Rama’s lotus feet and 
replied with joined palms, “Lord, it is no fault of mine.” Accompanied by His younger 
brother, the Lord went back to His hermitage on the bank of the Godavari. When He 
saw the hermitage bereft of Janaka’s Daughter, He felt as perturbed and afflicted as any 
common man. “ Alas! Sita, Janaka’s daughter, the very mine of virtues, of such flawless 
beauty, character, austerity and devotion!” Laksmana consoled Him in many ways. He 
questioned all the creepers and trees (that stood on the way ) as He went along (in 
search of Her): “ O birds and deer, O string of bees, have you seen the fawn-eyed Sita? 
The wagtail, the parrot, the pigeon, the deer, the fish, the swarms of bees, the clever 
cuckoo, the jasmine buds, the pomegranate, the lightning, the lotus, the autumnal moon, 
the gliding serpent, the noose of Varuna (the god of water), the bow of Cupid, the swan, 
the elephant and the lion now hear themselves praised. The Bilva fruit and the gold 
banana rejoice and do not feel the least misgiving or bashfulness* Listen, Janaka’s 
daughter : in your absence today they are all glad as if they have got a Kingdom. How 
can you bear such rivalry? Why do you not reveal yourself quickly, my darling?” In this 
way the Lord searched and lamented like an uxorious husband sore smitten with pangs 
of separation. Sri Rama, who is Bliss personified and has all His wishes accomplished, 
and who is both unborn and immortal, behaved like a mortal. Further on they saw the 
king of vultures lying, with his thoughts fixed on Sri Rama’s feet which bear characteristic 
marks on their soles. f (1 — 9) 

* Sri Rama here well-nigh exhausts the list of birds and beasts as well as of inanimate objects to which 
Indian poets usually liken the limbs of a charming lady. Of these the eyes are compared to the fish and the 
wagtail as well as to the eyes of a fawn, the nose to the parrot’s beak, the neck to that of the pigeon, the curly 
hair to a swarm of bees, the voice to the notes of a cuckoo, the teeth to the jasmine buds and the seeds of the 
pomegranate, the complexion to the lightning, the eyes and the face as well as the hand and feet to the lotus, 
the face to the autumnal moon, the braid of hair hanging on the back to a gliding serpent, the smile to the 
noose of Varuna, the eyebrows to Cupid’s bow, the gait to that of the swan and the elephant, the waist to that 
of the lion, the breasts to the Bilva fruit and the thigh to the gold banana. The idea here is that though models 
of beauty so far as earthly women are concerned, none of these analogues stood comparison with Sita’s 
limbs and hence they dare not face the latter out of shame. Now that Sita was no more to be seen, they all 
regained their supremacy and exulted over their good fortune. 

t The scriptures mention 48 marks on the soles of the Lord’s feet, 24 on each. Those on the left are: 
(1) a vertical line (Urdhvarekha), (2) a Svastika, (3) an Astakona ( a figure consisting of a pair of squares 
intersecting each other), (4) Goddess LaksmT (represented by a golden coil describing two and a half concentric 
circles), (5) a plough, (6) a pestle, (7) a figure of Sesa (the serpent-god), (8) an arrow, (9) the sky (represented 
by a cipher), (10) a lotus, (11) a chariot, (12) a thunderbolt, (13) a grain of barley, (14) the wish-yielding 




710 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 122

The Hero of Raghu’s line, the ocean of mercy, caresse Jatayu’s head with His lotus 
hands. As the bird gazed on Sri Rama’s countenance, the home of loveliness, all his pain 
disappeared. (30) 
The vulture now recovered himself and spoke as follows: “Listen, Rama, the allayer 
of the fear of transmigration: it was the ten-headed Ravana, my lord, who reduced me 
to this plight; it was the same wretch who carried off Janaka’s daughter. He took Her tree in heaven, (15) a goad, (16) a flag, (17) a crown, (18) the discus ( Sudarsana), (19) a throne, 
(20) the staff of Yama (the god of death), (21) a chowrie, (22) an umbrella, (23) a human figure and 
(24) a wreath of victory (placed by a bride round the neck of the suitor of her choice); while those borne on the 
right sole are: (1 ) the river Sarayu, (2) a cow’s hoof, (3) the earth, (4) a pitcher, (5) a small flag, (6) a Jambu fruit 
(the black plum), (7) the crescent, (8) a conchshell, (9) a Satkona ( a figure consisting of a pair of triangles 
intersecting each other), (10) a triangle, (1 1) a mace, (12) a Jiva or the individual soul (represented by a point 
illustrating its atomic size), (13) Vindu ( a point) and (14) Sakti ( represented by a semi-circle and forming the 
base of the Vindu), (15) a reservoir of nectar, (16) three horizontal lines like the folds of the belly, (17) a fish, 
(1 8) the full-moon, (1 9) a lute, (20) a flute, (21 ) a bow, (22) a quiver, (23) a swan and (24) an ornament for the 
head of a lady. It should be remembered here that Sri STta also bears the same marks in Her soles, with this 
difference that the marks on SrT Rama’s right sole are borne by STta on Her left and vice-versa. 


* ARANYA-KANDA* 711 
away, holy sir, to the south while she kept screaming loudly as an osprey. I have survived, 
my lord, only to behold You, my life now is about to depart, O fountain of mercy.” Said 
Sri Rama, “Live yet more, Dear one.” He, however, replied with a smile on his 
countenance, “He whose very name, so declare the Vedas, redeems the most depraved 
soul even if it appears on his lips at the moment of his death, is present before me in 
a visible form ! What more is wanting now, for which I should retain my body any longer?” 
With His eyes full of tears the Lord of Raghus replied, “Dear father, you have attained 
to an enviable state by virtue of your own noble deeds. Nothing is difficult of attainment 
in this world to those who have others’ interests at heart. Casting off your body, dear 
father, proceed now to My divine abode. What shall I give you, when you have all your 
desires already accomplished ? (1 — 5) 

 “But on reaching there, sire, tell not my father about Sita’s abduction. If I am no 
other than Rama ( if I am what I am), the ten-headed Ravana and his whole house will 
go and say everything to him.” (31) 
The vulture now dropped his body and assumed Sri Hari’s own form, bedecked 
with many jewels and clad in a yellow attire of matchless splendour, and possessed of 
a dark hue and four long arms; and with his eyes full of tears he burst into praises of 
his lord. (1) 



712 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

“Glory to Sri Rama of incomparable beauty, who is absolute as well as qualified 
and the true impeller of Gunas (Maya) too. His fierce arrows are potent enough to cut 
off the terrible arms of the ten-headed Ravana. I incessantly adore the all-merciful Sri 
Rama, the ornament of the earth, who is endowed with a form dark as the rain-cloud, a 
face resembling the blue lotus and large eyes resembling the red lotus. Possessed of 
long arms, He rids His devotees of the fear of transmigration. His strength is immeasurable; 
He is without beginning and unborn, the one (without a second), unmanifest and 
imperceptible, beyond the reach of the senses, though attainable with the help of the 
Vedic hymns, the dispeller of pairs of opposites (such as joy and sorrow, birth and death, 
pleasure and pain etc.,) consciousness personified, the supporter of the earth, the 
delighter of the soul of countless saints and devotees who repeat the sacred Name of 
Rama. I ever extol Sri Rama, who loves and is loved by those who are free from desire 
and curbs the host of vicious propensities such as lust and so on. He, whom the Vedas 
glorify under the name of Brahma, pure (free from the taint of Maya), all-pervading, 
passionless and unborn, whom the sages attain to through manifold practices such as 
meditation, discretion, dispassion and Yoga (self-discipline), that fountain of mercy has 
become manifest as the very incarnation of beauty and enraptures the whole animate and 
inanimate creation. He is the bee that resides in the lotus of my heart and through 
every limb of His, shines the splendour of many a god of love. He, who is at once
inaccessible and easily accessible, who has a guileless disposition and is both partial and 
impartial and ever placid, whom the Yogis perceive with great effort subduing their senses 
and mind, that Rama, the abode of Rama (Goddess Laksmi) and the Lord of the three 
spheres (the entire creation) is ever at the beck and call of His devotees. May He abide 
in my heart, whose holy praises put a stop to transmigration.” (1 — 4) 
Asking the boon of uninterrupted devotion the vulture (Jatayu) ascended to Sri Hari’s 
Abode. Sri Rama performed his funeral rites with due ceremony and with His own hands. (32) 
The Lord of Raghus is most tender-hearted and compassionate to the humble and 
shows His mercy even where there is no occasion for it. On a vulture, who is a most 
unclean and carnivorous bird, He conferred a state which is solicited even by Yogis. 
Listen, Uma: those people are unfortunate indeed, who abandon Sri Hari and become 
attached to the object of sense. The two brothers proceeded further in quest of Sita and 
marked the thickening of the forest even as they went. The thicket was full of creepers 
and trees and inhabited by many birds and deer, elephants and lions, Sri Rama 
overthrew the demon Kabandha even as the latter met Him on the way; he told Him the 
whole story about the curse pronounced on him : “The sage Durvasa had imprecated me; 
the sin has now been wiped out by the sight of the Lord’s feet.” “Listen, O Gandharva, 
to what I tell you: I cannot tolerate an enemy of the Brahmanas.” (1 — 4) 



714 
Chapter 123

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

“He who without guile in thought, word and deed, does service to the Brahmanas 
(the very gods on earth), wins over Brahma, Siva, Myself and all other divinities. (33) 
 “A Brahmana, even though he curse you, beat you or speak harsh words to you, 
is still worthy of adoration: so declare the saints. A Brahmana must be respected, though 
lacking in amiability and virtue; not so a Sudra, though possessing a host of virtues and 
rich in knowledge.” The Lord instructed Kabandha in His own cult ( the cult of Devotion) 
and was delighted at heart to see his devotion to His feet. Having regained his original 
form (that of a Gandharva ) he bowed his head to the lotus feet of Sri Rama (the Lord 
of Raghus) and ascended to the heaven. Having conferred on him his own (Gandharva) 
state the beneficent Rama repaired to the hermitage of Sabarl*. When SabarT saw that 
Sri Rama had called at her abode, she recalled the words of the sage (Matanga)f and 
was glad of heart. With lotus-like eyes, long arms, a tuft of matted hair adorning their 

* Sabari was known by the name of the wild tribe (Sabaras) to which she belonged. Though low-born, 
she had already acquired some celebrity for her piety and devotion; hence the poet has chosen to call her 
abode a hermitage ( a name generally applied to the abode of sages and hermits). This can easily serve as 
an illustration of the catholicity of the great Hindu religion, which, though rigid in social matters, does not fail 
to give proper recognition to individual merit and virtue. The whole of this episode is a great eye-opener in this 
respect. 

t From other sources it can be gathered that the sage, who was Sabarfs own Guru, had predicted to 
her, on the eve of his demise long before, that the Lord would visit her. It is this prediction of the sage that has 
been referred to above. 




* ARANYA-KANDA* 715 

head like a crown and a garland of wild flowers hanging upon their breast, the two brothers 
looked most charming — the one dark of hue and the other fair; Sabari fell prostrate and 
embraced their feet. She was so owerwhelmed with love that no words came to her lips. 
Again and again she bowed her head at their lotus feet. Presently she look some water 
and reverently laved their feet and then conducted them to a seat of honour. (1 — 5) 
She brought and offered to Sri Rama the most delicious bulbs, roots and fruits. 
The Lord partook of them appreciating again and again. (34) 
Joining her palms she stood before Him; as she gazed upon the Lord her love 
waxed yet more ardent. “How can I extol You, lowest in descent and the dullest of wit 
as I am ? A woman is the lowest of those who rank as the lowest of the low. Of women 
again I am the most dull-headed, O Destroyer of sins.” Answered the Lord of Raghus: 
“Listen, O good lady, to My words I recognize no other kinship except that of Devotion. 
Despite caste, kinship, lineage, Dharma, reputation, wealth, physical strength, numerical 
strength of his family, accomplishments and ability, a man lacking in Devotion is of no 
more worth than a cloud without water. Now I tell you the nine forms of Devotion; please 
listen attentively and cherish them in your mind. The first in order is company with the 
saints and the second is marked by a fondness for My stories. (1 — 4) 

716 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

“Humble service of the lotus feet of one’s preceptor is the third form of Devotion, 
while the fourth type of Devotion consists in singing My praises with a guileless 
heart.” (35) 

Chapter 117

“Muttering My Name with unwavering faith constitutes the fifth form of adoration 
revealed in the Vedas. The sixth variety consists in the practice of self-control and virtue, 
desisting from manifold activities and ever pursuing the course of conduct prescribed for 
saints. He who practises the seventh type sees the world full of Me without distinction 
and reckons the saints as even greater than Myself. He who cultivates the eighth type 
of Devotion remains contented with whatever he gets and never thinks of detecting others’ 
faults. The ninth form of Devotion demands that one should be guileless and straight in 
one’s dealings with everybody, and should in his heart cherish implicit faith in Me without 
either exultation or depression. Whoever possesses any one of these nine forms of 
Devotion, be he man or woman or any other creature — sentient or insentient — is most
dear to Me, 0 good lady. As for yourself, you are blessed with unflinching devotion of all 
these types. The prize which is hardly won by the Yogis is within your easy reach today. 
The most incomparable fruit of seeing Me is that the soul attains its natural state. If you 
know anything about Janaka’s daughter, My good lady, tell Me her news, O fair dame.” “Go 
to the Pampa lake, O Lord of Raghus; there You will make friends with Sugriva. He will 
tell You everything, my Lord Rama, Hero of Raghu’s line; You are of steady resolve and 
know everything; nevertheless You ask me!” Bowing her head at the Lord’s feet again and 
again she lovingly related the whole story (of what the sage Matahga had told her and how 
eagerly she had watched His approach all the time). (1 — 7) 



After telling the whole story she gazed on the Lord’s countenance and imprinted 
the image of His lotus feet on her heart; and casting her body in the fire of Yoga she 
entered Sri Hari’s state wherefrom there is no return. “O men, abandon your varied 
activities, sins and diverse creeds, which all give birth to sorrow, and with genuine faith,” 
says Tulasldasa, “ be devoted to the feet of Sri Rama.” 
The Lord conferred final beatitude even on a woman who was not only an outcaste 
but a very mine of sin; you seek happiness, my most foolish mind, by forgetting such 
a master ! (36) 


718 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Sri Rama left even that forest and proceeded further. The two brothers were lions 
among men and possessed immeasurable strength. The Lord lamented like one smitten 
with pangs of separation; He narrated stories and had many a dialogue (with Laksmana). 
“Laksmana, mark the beauty of the forest; whose heart will not be stirred at its sight ? 
United with their mates all the swarms of birds and herds of deer are reproaching me as 
it were. When the bucks see me and scamper away (in fear), their mates would stop 
them saying, ‘You have nothing to fear; you may enjoy yourselves at will, O progeny of 
deer. He has come in search of a gold deer.’ The elephants would take their mates 
alongwith them as if to teach me a lesson (that a man should never leave his wife alone). 
The sacred lore, however thoroughly studied, must be gone through over and over again; 
a king, however well served, should never be depended upon; and a woman scriptures 
and king, even though you may cherish her in your bosom, is never thoroughly mastered. 
See, brother, how pleasant the spring is; yet to me, bereft of my beloved, it is frightful. 
(1-5) 
“ When the god of love found me tortured by separation, languishing and all alone, 
he rushed against me with the verdant forest, bees and birds for his army. His spy (the 
wind), however, has seen me with my brother and on his report the mind-born Cupid has 
held up his advancing army and besieged me as it were.” (37 A-B) 
* ARANYA-KANDA* 719 
“Creepers have entwined themselves round gigantic trees, spreading as it were, a 
variety of canopies in the sky. The plantains and stately palms are standing like beautiful 
pennons and standards; he alone who is stout of heart could help being fascinated by 
their sight. Trees of every description are adorned with flowers of various kinds, like 
warriors arrayed in all their different kinds of panoply. Other beautiful trees standing here 
and there look charming like champions separately encamped. The murmuring cuckoos 
are his excited elephants; herons and rooks, his camels and mules; peacocks, Cakoras 
and parrots, his noble war-horses; the pigeons and swans, his Arab steeds; the 
partridges and quails, his foot soldiers. But there is no describing the whole host of 
Cupid. Mountain rocks are his chariots; the rills, his kettledrums; the Catakas, the bards 
that utter his praises; the garrulous bees are his trumpets and clarionets and the soft, 
cool and fragrant breezes have come in the capacity of his ambassadors. Accompanied 
by an army complete in all its four limbs (viz., the horse, the foot, the chariots and the 
elephants), he goes about challenging all to a combat. Laksmana, they who remain firm 
even at the sight of Cupid’s battle-array are men that count in this world. His greatest 
strength lies in woman; he alone who can escape her is a mighty champion. (1 — 6) 


720 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “Brother, there are three evils most formidable of all — lust, anger and greed. In an 
instant they distract the mind of hermits who are the very repositories of wisdom. The 
weapons of greed are desire and hypocrisy, of lust naught but woman; while anger’s 
weapon is harsh speech: so declare the great sages after deep thought.” (38 A-B) 


Chapter 118
Sri Rama, dear Uma, (says Bhagavan Siva) is beyond the three Gunas (Sattva, 
Rajas and Tamas), though the lord of the animate and inanimate creation, and the inner 
controller of all. (By speaking as above) He demonstrated the miserable plight of earthly 
lovers and strengthened dispassion in the mind of the wise. Anger, lust, greed, pride and 
delusion, all these get eliminated through Sri Rama’s grace. He who wins the favour of 
that divine player is never deluded by His jugglery. Uma, I tell you my own realization; 
the only thing real is worship of Sri Rama, and the whole world is a dream. The Lord then 
repaired to the shore of the deep and beautiful lake known by the name of Pampa. Its 
water was as limpid as the heart of saints and it had charming flights of steps on all its 
four sides. Beasts of various kinds drank of its water wherever they listed, as if there 
was a crowd of beggars ever present at the house of a generous man. (1 — 4) 




* ARANYA-KANDA* 721 
Covered by dense lotus leaves the water could not be easily discerned, even as 
the attributeless Brahma is not perceived when veiled by Maya (Ignorance). All the fishes 
that had their abode in the fathomless water of the lake were uniformly happy, even as 
the virtuous ever pass their days peacefully. (39 A-B) 
Lotuses of different colours had opened their petals and swarms of bees sweetly 
hummed. Swans and waterfowls made such a noise as though they had burst into 
the Lord’s praises the moment they saw Him. Birds like the Cakrawaka and the heron 
were lovely beyond words; one could form an idea of their beauty only after seeing 
them. The voice of the beautiful birds was so captivating that it seemed they invited 
the wayfarers who passed by them. By the side of the lake hermits had erected their 
thatched cottages; there were charming forest trees all around. The Campaka, the 
Bakula, the Kadamba, the Tamala, the Patala, the Panasa, the Palasa, the mango 
and many other varieties of trees had put forth new leaves and blosoms and swarms 
of bees hummed on them. A delightful breeze which was naturally cool, gentle and 
fragrant, ever breathed there. The cuckoos cooed so sweetly that their melody disturbed 
the hermits in their meditation. (1 — 5) 


722 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 124

Weighed down with the load of their fruits all the fruit trees well-nigh touched 
the ground, even as benevolent souls grow all the more humble on getting a large 
fortune. (40) 
When Sri Rama saw this most beautiful lake, He took a dip into it and felt supremely 
delighted. Seeing the pleasant shade of a stately tree, the Lord of Raghus sat in it with 
His younger brother. There all the gods and sages came once more and having hymned 
His praises returned to their several homes. The All-merciful sat in a most cheerful mood 
and discoursed with His younger brother on delightful topics. When the sage Narada saw 
the Lord suffering the pangs of separation, he felt much perturbed at heart. “ It is in 
submission to my curse* that the Lord is undergoing many hardships of an oppressive 
nature. Let me, therefore, go and see such a noble Lord; for such an opportunity may 
not present itself again,” Reflecting thus Narada went, lute in hand, to the spot where the 
Lord was sitting at ease. He fondly sang in a soft voice the exploits of Sri Rama dwelling 
upon them in all detail. As he prostrated himself the Lord lifted him up and held him in 
His embrace for a long time. After enquiring of his welfare He seated him by His side, 
while Laksmana reverently laved His feet. (1 — 6) 


Vide Balakanda, the Caupais following Doha 136, Doha 137 and the Caupais coming after it. 




* ARANYA-KANDA* 723 

After much supplication and realizing that the Lord was pleased at heart, Narada 
joined his lotus palms and spoke as follows: — (41) 
 “ Listen, O Lord of Raghus, generous by nature as You are: You confer delightful 
boons that are unattainable as well as those that are attainable. Grant me, my master, only 
one boon that I ask of You, even though You already know it (even without my asking), 
indwelling as You do the hearts of all.” “ You know my disposition, dear sage: do I ever 
hide anything from my devotees ? What object do I hold so dear, O chief of sages, that 
you may not ask it of Me ? There is nothing which I may withhold from my votary: never 
give up this belief even by mistake.” Then Narada gladly said, “This is the boon I presume 
to ask: even though my lord has many names, each greater than the other, as the Vedas 
declare, let the name RAMA, my lord, surpass all other names in exterminating the whole 
brood of sins even as a fowler kills an entire flock of birds. (1 — 4) 

724 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “ May the name RAMA shine as the moon and the other names as so many stars 
in the cloudless sky of Your devotee’s heart during the full-moon night of devotion to 
You.” “The all-merciful Lord of Raghus replied to the sage, “So be it ” Thereupon Narada 
felt much delighted at heart and bowed at the Lord’s feet. (42 A-B) 
Seeing the Lord of Raghus so highly pleased, Narada spoke again in gentle tones — 
” Listen, O Rama: when You impelled Your Maya (deluding potency) and infatuated me, 
O Lord of Raghus, I wanted to marry. Why, then, did You not let me accomplish my 
desire ?” “ Listen, O sage: I tell you with all the emphasis at My command that I always 
take care of those who worship Me with undivided faith, even as a mother guards her 
child. If an infant child runs to catch hold of fire or a snake, the mother holds it aside. 
When, however, her son has grown up she loves him no doubt, but not as before. The 
wise are like My grown up sons, while humble devotees are like My infant children. A devotee 
depends on Me, while the former ( a wise man) depends on his own strength; and both 
have to face enemies like lust and anger. Pondering thus the prudent adore Me and never 
take leave of devotion even after attaining wisdom. (1 — 5) 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 


725 
Chapter 125

“Lust, anger, greed, pride etc., constitute the most powerful army of Ignorance. But 
among them all the fiercest and the most troublesome is that incarnation of Maya (the 


Lord’s deluding potency) called woman.” 

“ Listen, O sage: the Puranas, the Vedas and the saints declare that woman is like 
the vernal season to the forest of ignorance. Nay, like the hot season she dries up all the 
ponds and lakes of Japa (the muttering of prayers), austerity and religious observances. 
Again, lust, anger, pride and jealousy are so many frogs as it were; like the rainy season 
woman is the only agency that gladdens them all. Even so latent desires of a vicious type 
are like a bed of lilies, to which, like the autumn, she is ever agreeable. All the different 
virtues are like a bed of lotuses; like the middle of winter, woman, who is a source of base 
(sensuous) pleasure, blights them all. Again, the overgrowth of the Yavasa plant in the 
shape of mineness flourishes when the close of winter in the shape of woman appears. For 
owls in the shape of sins woman is a delightful night thick with darkness. Even so reason, 
strength, virtue and truth are all so many fishes as it were; and woman, so declare the wise, 
is like a hook to catch them.” (1 — 4) 
“A young woman is the root of all evil, a source of torment and a mine of all woes. 
Therefore, bearing this in mind, O sage, I prevented your marriage.” (44) 


726 
Chapter 126

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
As the sage listened to the delightful words of Sri Rama (the Lord of Raghus), a thrill 
ran through his body and his eyes filled with tears. He said to himself, “Tell me, is there 
any other master whose wont it is to show such attachment and fondness for his servants? 
Men who refuse to worship such a lord shaking off all delusion are bankrupt of wisdom, 
dull-writted and wretched.” The sage Narada again reverentially spoke to the Lord, “ Listen, 
O Rama, who are well-versed in sacred lore: tell me, my lord Raghuvira (Hero of Raghu’s 
line), the distinguishing marks of saints, O dispeller of the fear of transmigration.” “I tell you, 
dear sage, the qualities of saints, by virtue of which they hold Me in subjection. They are 
masters of the six passions (lust, anger, greed, infatuation, pride and jealousy), sinless, 
disinterested, firm, possessing nothing, pure (both within and without), full of bliss, of 
boundless wisdom, desireless, moderate in diet, truthful, inspired, learned and united with 
God, circumspect, bestowing honour on others, free from pride, strong-minded and highly 
conversant with the course of Dharma (righteousness). (1 — 5) 
“ They are abodes of virtue, above the sorrows of the world and free from doubt. 
Nothing besides My lotus feet is dear to them, not even their body nor their home.” (45) 

* ARANYA-KANDA* 727 
“They blush to hear themselves praised but feel much delighted to hear others’ 
praises. Even-minded and placid, they never abandon the right course. Guileless by 
nature and loving, they are given over to prayer, austerity, control of the senses, self- 
denial and religious observances and undertake sacred vows. They are devoted to the 
feet of their Guru, Lord Govinda (Visnu) and the Brahmanas. They are full of piety, 
forgiving, friendly to all, compassionate, cheerful under all circumstances and sincerely 
devoted to My feet. They are further characterized by dispassion, discretion, modesty, 
knowledge of the truth relating to God as well as by a correct knowledge of the Vedas 
and Puranas. They never take recourse to hypocrisy, pride or arrogance nor set their 
foot on the evil path even by mistake. They are ever engaged in singing or hearing My 
stories and are intent on doing good to others without any consideration. In short, O good 
sage, the qualities of the saints are so numerous that they cannot be exhausted even 
by Sarada (the goddess of speech) nor by the Vedas.” (1 — 4) 
 “Neither Sarada nor Sesa could tell them!” Even as he heard this the sage Narada 
clasped the Lord’s lotus feet. In this way the all-merciful Lord, the befriender of the meek, 
recounted with His own lips the virtues of His devotees. Narada bowed his head at the 
Lord’s feet again and again and left for the abode of Brahma (the Creator). Blessed are 
they, says Tulasidasa, who, giving up all hopes, are steeped in love for Sri Hari. 

728 


Chapter 127
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

People who sing or hear the sanctifying praises of Ravana’s Foe shall be 
rewarded with steadfast devotion to Sri Rama even without dispassion, japa or concentration 
of mind. The body of a young woman is like fhe flame of a candle; be not a moth to it, 
O my mind. Abandoning lust and pride worship Sri Rama and enjoy the company of 
saints. (46A-B) 
Thus ends the third descent into the Manasa lake of Sri Rama’s exploits, 
that eradicates all the impurities of the Kali age. 

