(The Manasa lake containing the exploits of Sri Rama) 

Descent Four 


(Kiskindha-Kanda) 
Chapter 128
Lovely as jasmine and blue lotus, of surpassing strength, repositories of wisdom, 
endowed with natural grace, excellent bowmen, hymned by the Vedas, and lovers of the 
cow and the Brahmanas, who appeared in the form of mortal men through their own Maya 
(deluding potency) as the two noble scions of Raghu, the armours of true religion, friendly to 
all and journeying in quest for Sita, may they both grant us Devotion. (1) 


Blessed are those pious souls who ceaselessly quaff the nectar of Sri Rama’s 
Name, churned out of the ocean of the Vedas, which completely destroys the sins of the 
Kali age and knows no decay, which shines ever bright in the most beautiful moon-like 




730 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


mouth of the glorious Sambhu (Lord Siva), a palatable remedy for the disease of 
transmigration and the very life of Sita (Janaka’s Daughter). (2) 
Why not reside in Kasi (the modern Varanasi), the abode of Sambhu and Bhavanf 
(Goddess Parvati), knowing it to be the birthplace of Mukti (final beatitude), the mine of 
spiritual wisdom and the destroyer of sins? O stupid mind, how is it that you do not 
worship Him who drank off the deadly venom (churned out of the ocean of milk ), the very 
presence of which was burning all the host of gods? Who else is so merciful as Lord 
Sankara? 
The Lord of Raghus proceeded still further and approached the Rsyamuka hill. 
There dwelt Sugriva (a monkey chief*) with his counsellors. When he saw the two 

* Though monkeys to all appearance, Sugriva and others were as good as highly civilized men and 
were incarnations of gods. They could change their form at will and were not only endowed with human 

* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 731 

Chapter 129
brothers, the very embodiments of immeasurable strength, he was exceedingly alarmed 
and said (to one of his ministers), “Listen, Hanuman: those two men are repositories of 
strength and beauty. Disguised as a Brahmana student go and see them and perceiving 
their intention in your mind inform me accordingly by means of signs. If they have been 
despatched by the malicious Vali, I must leave this hill and flee away at once.” Taking 
the form of a Brahmana the monkey (Hanuman) went up to the two brothers and bowing 
his head accosted them thus: “Who are you, heroes — one of dark hue, the other fair — 
that roam the woods disguised as Ksatriyas? Treading the hard ground with your tender 
feet, wherefore are you wandering in the forest, my masters? Though possessed of 
delicate, charming and beautiful limbs, how is it that you have exposed yourself to the 
scorching sun and stormy wind of these wild regions? Do you count in the Trinity (viz., 
Brahma, Visnu and Siva, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the three worlds) or are 
you the twin divine sages Nara and Narayana? (1 — 5) 
 “Or are you the Lord of all the spheres the Prime Cause of the world and , 
manifested in human form to bridge the ocean of mundane existence and relieve the 
burden of the earth?” (1) 
 “We are sons of King Dasaratha, the lord of Kosala, and have come to the forest speech but were proficient in the arts and sciences. They walked straight, even though they could easily climb 
up to tree-tops and mountain-summits. They can thus be easily classed as a human tribe or clan. 

732 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
in obedience to our father’s command. We two brothers are called by the names of Rama 
and Laksmana. We had with us a pretty and delicate girl, the daughter of King Videha, 
who has been carried away by some demon here. It is in quest of her that we are moving 
about, O holy Brahmana. We have furnished you with our account in some detail; now 
tell us your story in a comprehensive manner, O good Brahmana.” Now Hanuman 
recognized his lord and falling to the ground clasped His feet. That joy, Uma, was more 
than could be described. A thrill ran through his body and no words came to his lips as 
he gazed on the lovely style of their dress. Then recovering himself he sang His praises 
and was glad at heart to have found his master. “ It was quite in the fitness of things that 
I questioned my lord; but how is it that You ask me like a mortal? I have been roving 
in error under the spell of Your Maya ( deluding potency); it was for this reason that I 
failed to recognize my lord.” (1 — 5) 
 “In the first place I am dull-witted and deluded, wicked at heart and ignorant; to 
crown all, my master, who are a befriender of the humble and are no other than the 
almighty Lord Yearself, had forgotten me.” (2) 

“Although, my lord, I have many faults, let not the servant be cast into oblivion by 
the master. The Jiva (ego), O Lord, is deluded by Your Maya and can be redeemed only 
by Your grace. On top of it, I swear by the Hero of Raghu’s line, I know neither adoration 
nor any other means (of pleasing You). A servant depends on his master and a child on 
its mother and both remain free from anxiety; for a master needs must take care of his 

* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 733 

servant.” So saying he fell at the Lord’s feet much agitated; his heart was overwhelmed 
with love and he manifested his own (monkey) form. The Lord of Raghus then lifted and 
clasped him to His bosom and soothed him by wetting him with the tears of His eyes. 
“Listen, O Hanuman: be not depressed at heart; you are twice as dear to Me as 
Laksmana. Everyone says that I look upon all with the same eye; but a devotee is 
particularly dear to Me because he too depends on none but Me.” (1 — 4) 
“And he alone, Hanuman, is exclusively devoted to Me, who is steadfast in his 
conviction that he is the servant and that the as manifasted form of the Lord whole 
animate and inanimate creation is his master.” (3) 

When Hanuman, the son of the wind-god, found his master so tararable to him he 
rejoiced at heart and all his agony gome. “My Lord, on the summit of this hill dwells 
Sugriva, the chief of the monkeys; he is a servant of Yours. Make friends with him, my 
lord; knowing him to be in affliction rid him of all fear. He will have Slta tracked by drafting 
millions of monkeys in every direction (in search of Her).” Having thus explained to Him 
everything, he lifted both the brothers on his back (and took them to the place where 
Sugriva was). When Sugriva saw Sri Rama, he accounted his birth as highly blessed. 
He reverently advanced to meet Him and bowed his head at His feet; while the Lord of 
Raghus and His younger brother embraced him in return. The monkey chief pondered 
thus within himself, “Will they, good heavens, make friends with me?” (1 — 4) 

734 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 130
Then Hanuman related all the circumstances of both the sides, and having 
installed the sacred fire as a witness he concluded a firm alliance (between Sri Rama 
and Sugriva). (4) 

The alliance was thus unreservedly concluded and Laksmana narrated all the past 
history of Sri Rama. Said Sugriva with his eyes full of tears, “The daughter of Janaka 
(the lord of Mithila), my lord, will be surely recovered. On one occasion when I sat here 
deliberating with my counsellors I saw her fallen in the enemy’s hands and being borne 
through the air loudly wailing. Crying ‘Rama, Rama, Ah! my Rama’ she dropped her scarf 
when she saw us.” When Sri Rama asked for that he handed it over to Him at once. Sri 
Rama pressed it to His bosom and grieved much. Said Sugriva, “Listen, O hero of 
Raghu’s line; sorrow no more and take courage in your heart. I will render service to you 
in every way so that Janaka’s daughter may come and see you.” (1 — 4) 
The Ocean of Mercy, who was at the same time the embodiment of physical 
strength, rejoiced to hear his ally’s words, “Tell me, Sugriva, why have you come to stay 
in the forest?” (5) 
* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 


735 
“My lord, Vali and myself are two brothers. The affection that existed between us 
was past all telling. Once upon a time, O lord, the son of the demon Maya, who was 
known by the name of MayavT, came to our town (Kiskindha). At dead of night he called 
out at the gate of the town. Vali could not brook his enemy’s challenge to a bout and 
sallied forth to meet him. But when he saw Vali coming, he took to flight. I too had 
accompanied my brother. The enemy went and entered the cave of a big mountain. Then 
Vali gave instructions to me, “Await my return till a fortnight. If I do not return, then take 
me as slain.” When I had waited there for a month, O slayer of Khara, a copious stream 
of blood issued from the cave. I, therefore, concluded that the demon had slain Vali and 
that he would come and kill me too. Accordingly I blocked the mouth of the cave with 
a rock and fled away. When the ministers saw the town without a master, they forced 
me to accept the throne. Meanwhile Vali, who had killed the enemy, returned home and 
saw me (installed on the throne), he nursed a grudge against me in his heart. He gave 
me a most severe beating as he would an enemy, and robbed me of all that I had 

736 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


including my wife. For fear of him, 0 gracious Hero of Raghu’s line, I wandered all over 
the world in a pitiable condition. A curse* prevents him from coming over here; yet I 
remain ill at ease in mind.” When the gracious Lord heard of His devotee’s distress both 
His long arms started throbbing (thus showing His martial spirit as well as His 
determination to punish Vali). (1 — 7) 
 “Listen, Sugriva: I will kill Vali with a single arrow His life will not be saved even 
if he takes refuge with Brahma (the Creator) or even with Rudra (Lord Siva). (6) 

* The demon Mayavi had a younger brother, Dundubhi by name. Dundubhi too had, on a previous 
occasion, attacked Vali in the form of a buffalo and was slain by him. Vali hurled the gigantic corpse of the 
buffalo to a distance of eight miles from his capital. A few drops of blood, however, fell from its mouth in the 
hermitage of sage Matanga on the Rsyamuka hill. This enraged the Rsi, who pronounced a curse that 
whoever had desecrated his hermitage by spilling blood there would have his head shattered to pieces if he 
dared approach the precincts of his hermitage. 




* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 737 

Chapter 131
 “One would incur great sin by the very sight of those who are not distressed to 
see the distress of a friend. A man should regard his own mountain-like troubles as 
of no more account than a mere grain of sand, while the troubles of a friend should 
appear to him like Mount Sumeru, though really they may be as trifling as a grain of 

738 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
sand. Those fools who are not of such a temperament presume in vain to make friends 
with anybody. A friend should restrain his companion from the evil path and lead him 
on the path of virtue; he should proclaim the latter’s good points and screen his faults, 
should give and take things without any scruple and serve his friend’s interest to the 
best of his ability and finding him in distress love him a hundred times more than ever. 
The Vedas declare these to be the qualities of a noble friend. He, however, who 
contrives to speak bland words to your face and harms you behind your back and 
harbours some evil design in his heart, and whose mind is as tortuous as the movements 
of a snake is an unworthy friend and one had better bid good-bye to such a friend. A 
stupid servant, a stingy monarch, a bad wife and a false friend — these four are 
tormenting like a pike. Relying on my strength, dear friend, grieve no more; I will serve 
your cause in everyway possible.” Said Sugriva, “Listen, O Hero of Raghu’s race: Vali 
is possessed of immense strength and is exceedingly staunch in battle.” He then 
showed Him Dundubhi’s bones and the seven palm-trees, which were struck down by 
the Lord of Raghus without any exertion. When Sugriva witnessed Sri Rama’s 
immeasurable strength his affection for Him grew all the more and he was now satisfied 
that he would succeed in killing Vali. He bowed his head at His feet again and again 
and was delighted at heart to recognize the Lord. When the light of wisdom dawned 
on him, he said; “My mind, O Lord, has been set at rest by Your grace. Renouncing 
pleasure, prosperity, home, personal glory and all I will render service to You. All these 
are stumbling-blocks on the path of Devotion to Sri Rama (Yourself): so declare saints 
given to the worship of Your feet. Pairs of opposites such as friend and foe, joy and 
sorrow, in this world are products of Maya (Illusion) and have no reality. Vali is my 
greatest friend, by whose grace I have met You, Rama, the Allayer of sorrow. On waking 
from a dream when a man comes to know the identity of him with whom he had fought 
in the dream, he feels abashed. Now, my Lord, do me this favour that I may renounce 
all and worship You night and day.” On hearing the words of Sugriva, imbued as they 
were with dispassion, Sri Rama, who held a bow in His hand, smiled and said, “Whatever 
you have said is all true; but my words, O friend, can never be otherwise.” Sri Rama 
(says the saint Kakabhusundi), O Garuda (king of birds), makes us all dance even as 
a juggler would make his monkey dance: so declare the Vedas. Taking Sugriva with 
Him the Lord of Raghus proceeded with a bow and arrow in His hands. Then the Lord 
of Raghus sent Sugriva, who, strengthened by Sri Rama, thundered under the very nose 
of Vali. On hearing his roar Vali sallied forth frantic with fury. His wife, however, clasped 
his feet with her hands and warned him thus: “Listen, my lord: the two brothers with 
whom Sugriva has concluded an alliance are of unapproachable majesty and might. 
They are no other than Sri Rama and Laksmana, the sons of King Dasaratha (the lord 
of Kosala), who can conquer Death himself on the field of battle.” (1 — 15) 

Said Vali, “Listen, my timid darling, the Lord of Raghus looks upon all with the 
same eye. Even if He kills me, I will attain His divine abode and have Him as my eternal 
Lord.” (7) 

Chapter 132



* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 739 
So saying he sallied forth in his great pride, thinking no more of Sugriva than of 
a blade of grass. The two brothers closed with each other. Vali browbeat Sugriva, and 
striking him with his fist roared in a thundering voice. Sugriva now fled in dismay (and 
returned to Sri Rama); the stroke of his clenched fist had fallen on him as a bolt from 
heaven. “What did I say, O gracious Hero of Raghu’s line? This is no brother of mine 
but Death himself.” “You two brothers are identical in appearance; it was because of this 
confusion that I did not kill him.” He stroked Sugriva’s body with His hand and lo ! It 
became as hard as adamant and all his pain was gone. He put on his neck a wreath of 
flowers and giving him enormous strength sent him back. Again the two brothers fought 
in many ways, while the Lord of Raghus watched them from behind a tree. (1 — 4) 
When Sugriva had tried many a trick and exerted all his might he lost heart and 
felt much alarmed. Sri Rama then drew His arrow and shot Vali in the heart. (8) 
740 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Struck by the shaft Vali fell to the ground smarting with pain; again he sprang up 
and sat, when he saw the Lord before him — dark of hue, with His matted hair coiled on 
His head, bloodshot eyes and the bow still drawn. Gazing on Him again and again he 
fixed his heart on His feet; now that he recognized the Lord he felt that he had realized 
the reward of his birth. Although his heart was full of love, the words on his lips were 
harsh; looking towards Sri Rama he said, “Even though, my lord, You descended on 
earth for upholding righteousness. You have killed me as a hunter would. I, Your enemy 
and Sugriva, Your dear friend! For what fault did You take my life, my lord?” “Listen, O 
wretch: a younger brother’s wife, a sister, a daughter-in-law and one’s own daughter — 
these four are alike. One would incur no sin by killing him who looks upon these with an 
evil eye. Fool, in your extravagant pride you paid no heed to your wife’s warning. You 
knew that your brother had taken refuge under the might of my arm; and yet in your vile 
arrogance you sought to kill him!” (1 — 5) 
 “Listen, Rama: my shrewdness cannot avail against my master. But, my lord, am 
I a sinner yet even though I have found shelter in You at the hour of my death?” (9) 


* KISKINDHA-KANDA *

741 
When Sri Rama heard this most tender speech of Vali, He stroked his head with 
His hand. “ I make your body immortal; you may keep up your life.” Said Vali, “Listen, 
O Ocean of Mercy: sages continue their efforts (for God-Realization) during successive 
births; but at the last moment they fail to utter the name ‘Rama’. But He, on the strength 
of whose Name Lord Sankara bestows immortality* on all alike, has appeared in a visible 
form before my very eyes! Shall I ever get such a golden opportunity again? (1 — 3) 


“He has appeared before my very eyes, whose praises the Vedas ever sing 
only in negative terms and whom sages are scarcely able to perceive in their meditation 
even after they have controlled their breath and mind and freed their senses from 
passion. Knowing me to be a victim of excessive pride the Lord said to me, 1 Preserve 
your life!’ But who would be such a fool as to insist on cutting down a celestial tree 
and using it as a fence to protect an acacia tree? Now, my lord, look upon me with 
compassion and grant me the boon that I ask; in whatever species of life it may be 
my fate to be born, I may continue to love Sri Rama’s (Your) feet. This son of mine, 
Arigada by name, is my equal in humilibity and strength. O Bestower of Blessedness; 
therefore, accept him, my master; and holding him by the arm, O Lord of gods and 
men, treat him as Your servant.” (1-2) 

* It is mentioned in the scriptures that Lord Siva personally whispers the name ‘Rama’ into the right 
ear of every creature dying at KasT and redeems its soul. 




742 

Chapyer 133
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Intensifying his devotion to Sri Rama’s feet Vali dropped his body (without his 
knowing it) even as an elephant little knows the falling of a wreath of flowers from its 
neck. (10) 
Sri Rama sent away Vali to His own abode. All the people of the city ran in dismay. 
With dishevelled hair and a tottering frame Tara (Vali’s wife) wailed in many ways. When 
the Lord of Raghus saw her distress, He imparted to her wisdom and dispelled her 
delusion. “Made up of the five elements, viz., earth, water, fire, ether and air, this body 
is extremely vile. The mortal frame lies, buried in eternal sleep before your eyes, while 
the soul is everlasting. For whom, then, do you lament ?” The light of wisdom dawned 
on her and now she embraced His feet and asked of Him the boon of supreme Devotion. 
The almighty Sri Rama, O Uma (says Bhagavan Sankara) makes us all dance like so 
many marionettes. Sri Rama then gave orders to Sugriva, who performed all the funeral 
rites with due ceremony. He next instructed His younger brother (Laksmana), “Go and 
crown Sugriva as the king.” Bowing their head to the Lord of Raghus, all left in obedience 
to His orders. (1 — 5) 




* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 743 
Laksmana immediately summoned the citizens and the Brahmanas and (in their 
presence) crowned Sugriva as the king and installed Arigada as the Crown Prince. (11) 

Uma, there is no such friend as Sri Rama in this world — neither preceptor, nor father, 
nor mother, nor brother, nor master. Gods, men and sages, all as a rule have some selfish 
motive behind their love. The same Sugriva who trembled day and night in fear of Vali, who 
had many a sore on his body and whose breast ever burnt with the fire of anxiety, was 
made the king of monkeys! The Hero of Raghu’s line, is extremely compassionate by 
nature. No wonder that men who knowingly abandon such a lord, should be caught in the 
meshes of calamity. The Lord then sent for Sugriva and instructed him in the various 
principles of statecraft. Said the Lord, “Listen, O Sugriva, lord of the monkeys: I may not 
enter a town for four years and ten. The hot season is now over and the rains have set in. 

I will, therefore, encamp on the hills not far from you. You and Arigada rule over the 
kingdom, and ever cherish my business in your heart.” When Sugriva returned home, Sri 
Rama took up His abode on the Pravarsana hills. (1 — 5) 

744 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 134

The gods had already kept ready for Him a charming cave in the mountain in the 
hope that the all-merciful Sri Rama would come and stay there for some time. (12) 

The lovely forest, rich in flowers, presented a most splendid sight with its swarms 
of bees humming in greed of honey. Delightful bulbs, roots, fruits and leaves grew in 
abundance from the time the Lord came there. Seeing the mountain incomparable in its 
charms Sri Rama, the suzerain Lord of gods, stayed there with His younger brother. 
Taking the form of bees, birds and beasts, gods, Siddhas and hermits did service to the 
Lord. The forest became a picture of felicity from the time Sri Rama, the Lord of Laksmi 
(the goddess of prosperity), took up His residence there. There was a delightful and 
glistening rock of crystal, on which the two brothers sat at ease. Sri Rama gave a 
discourse to His younger brother on many a topic such as Devotion, dispassion, 
statecraft and spiritual wisdom. As the rains had set in, the sky was overcast with 
clouds, which made a delightful rumbling noise. (1 — 4) 
 “Look here, Laksmana: the peacocks dance at the sight of the clouds, even as 
a householder having a leaning towards dispassion would rejoice to see a devotee of 
Bhagavan Visnu.” (13) 
 “The roaming clouds are terribly thandering in the sky. Bereft as I am, of my 
darling (Sita), my heart trembles to see all this. The lightning flashes fitfully amid 
the clouds, like the friendship of the wicked, never endures. The pouring clouds cleave 
close to the ground even as the learned stoop beneath accumulated lore. The mountains 
endure the buffeting of showers even as a saint would put up with the taunts of the 
wicked. The swelling streamlets rush with great speed just as the wicked 
would feel elated even with a small fortune. The water becomes turbid the moment it 
descends on earth, even as the Jiva (an embodied soul) is enveloped in Maya as 
soon as born. The water coming from various directions gathers into a pool even as 
commendable virtues find their way into the heart of a noble soul. The water of the 
stream, becomes still once it entrs into the ocean, just as the ego finds eternal rest on 
attaining union with Sri Hari. (1 — 4) 
 “The green earth is so choked with grass that the tracks cannot be distinguished, 
just as holy books are obscured by heretic doctrines. (14) 
746 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “On all sides one hears the delightful croaking of frogs, which reminds one of a 
batch of religious students chanting the Vedas. Clothed with new leaves the trees of 
different species look as green and cheerful as the mind of a striving soul who has 
attained spiritual wisdom. The leaves of the Aka and Javasa plants have fallen off even 
as under a good government the plans of the wicked come to naught. Dust cannot be 
found even if one searches for it, just as piety is scared away by anger. The earth rich 
with crops appears as delightful as the wealth of a generous man. In the thick darkness 
of the night fireflies gleam like a mustered band of hypocrites. The embankments of the 
fields have been breached by torrential rains just as women get spoiled by freedom. 
Clever farmers weed out the grass from their crops, just as the wise discard infatuation, 
vanity and pride. The Cakravaka birds are no more to be seen, just as virtues disappear 
with the Kali age. Even though it rains on the barren lands as well, not a blade of grass 
sprouts on it, just as concupiscence takes no root in the heart of a servant of Sri Hari. 
The earth looks charming with the swarms of various living creatures even as the 
population grows under a good government. Many a weary traveller has stopped here and 
there just as with the dawning of wisdom the senses become still. (1 — 6) 
 “Sometimes a strong wind would blow and disperse the clouds in various directions, 




* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 747 

just as with the birth of an unworthy son the noble traditions of a family get extinct. Now 
it becomes pitch dark even during the day, while at other times the sun would shine 
brightly, just as the light of wisdom is obscured in the company of the vile and manifests 
itself in the company of the good. (15 A-B) 


Chapter 135
 “Look here, Laksmana: the rains are over now and the most charming autumn has 
arrived. The whole earth is covered by the Kasa grass with its white flowers as if the rainy 
season has exposed its old age. The constellation known by the name of Agastya 
(Canopus)* has appeared and dried up the water on the roads even as contentment 
swallows greed. The limpid water of the rivers and lakes looks charming as a saint’s heart 
devoid of pride and infatuation. Slowly but gradually the water of the streams and lakes is 
drying up even as the wise shake off the possessive instinct. Knowing that the autumn had 
set in the Khanjana bird has made its appearance, just as the welcome fruit of one’s 
meritorious deeds appears at the appointed time (neither sooner nor later). Devoid of mud 
and dust the earth has assumed a lovely aspect just like the administration of a monarch 
well-versed in politics. The fish are distressed on account of the diminishing waters even as 
an improvident householder suffering from want of money. The cloudless sky is shining as 
bright as a devotee of Sri Hari, who has abandoned all desires. Here and there we have light 
autumnal showers, just as a rare soul comes to develop devotion to Me. (1 — 5) 

* The heliacal rising of the constellation named above takes place on the seventh day after the new 
moon of the month of Bhadrapada. 


748 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “Kings and ascetics, merchants and mendicants are gladly leaving the city (kings 
for extending their dominions, ascetics in search of a suitable place for practising 
penance, merchants for carrying on their trade and mendicants for begging alms), just 
as men in any of the four stages* of life cease to toil (for perfection) once they have 
acquired devotion to Sri Hari. (16) 

“In deep waters the fish are as happy as ever, just as those who have taken 
refuge in Sri Hari (i.e. , Myself) never fall into trouble of any kind. With full-blown lotuses 
the lake appears as charming as when the absolute Brahma appears with form. The 
bees are making a humming sound which possesses a unique melody of its own, and 
the birds a charming concert of diverse sounds. The Cakravaka bird is sad at heart to 
see the night, just as a villain is grieved at the sight of another’s fortune. The Cataka 
cries out in its agony of excessive thirst just as an enemy of Sankara knows no rest. 
The moon by night relieves the heat of the autumnal sun, just as the sight of a holy man 
drives away sin. Flocks of Cakora birds fix their gaze on the moon as soon as she 
comes to their view, even as the votaries of Sri Hari on meeting Him. Mosquitoes and 
gadflies have perished due to fear of cold, just as hostility to the Brahmanas brings, ruin 
to the entire family. (1 — 4) 
* The four stages of life through which a Brahmana in particular and all the twice-born in general 
have to pass are: (1) Brahmacarya (student life), (2) Garhasthya (married life), (3) Vanaprastha (asceticism) 
and (4) Samnyasa (renunciation). 

* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 749 


“The insects that teemed on the earth have perished with the advent of the 
autumn, just as a man who has found a teacher in the real sense of the term, is rid of 
all doubt and error. (17) 

“The rains are over and the autumn, which is marked by a cloudless sky and 
limpid waters, has arrived; yet, dear brother, we have received no news about Slta. If 
only once I could anyhow come to know of her whereabouts I would recover her out of 
the hands of even Death himself. Wherever she may be, if only she is still alive I would 
make an effort to rescue her, dear brother. Sugriva too has forgotten me now that he has 
got a kingdom, a treasury, the amenities of city life and his own spouse. I will shoot the 
fool tomorrow with the same arrow which I used in killing Vali.” (Says Sankara) He whose 
very grace rids one of pride and infatuation, could He ever dream of being angry, Uma ? 
Those enlightened sages alone who have conceived a love for the feet of Sri Rama (the 
Hero of Raghu’s race) can know the inwardness of this conduct of His. When Laksmana 
found the Lord angry, he strung his bow and took arrows in his hands. (1 — 4) 
The Lord of Raghus, who was the highest limit of compassion, then instructed His 
younger brother saying, “Sugriva is our friend, dear brother; you should only frighten him 
and bring him here.” (18) 
750 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

There (at Kiskindha) Hanuman, the son of the wind-god, thought to himself, 
“Sugriva has forgotten the task entrusted to him by Sri Rama.” Approaching Sugriva, 
therefore, he bowed his head at his feet and tried to bring him round by employing all 
the four methods of persuasion*. Sugriva felt much alarmed to hear the words of 
Hanuman. “Sensuality has robbed me of my senses. Now, O son of the wind-god, 
troops of monkeys are scattered here and there: send batches of messengers to them 
and have it proclaimed that anyone who fails to appear before me within a fortnight, shall 
meet his death at my hands.” Thereupon Hanuman sent for envoys and receiving them 
most politely charged them with their duty making use of threats, blandishments and 
persuasion. They all bowed their head at his feet and proceeded on their journey. That 
very moment Laksmana entered the city; seeing him angry monkeys ran away helter- 
skelter. (1 — 4) 
Laksmana then strung his bow and said, “I will burn the city to ashes (by making 
use of the Agni-astra)”. Thereupon came Vali’s son (prince Arigada), seeing the whole 
city in dismay. (19) 

* The four recognized methods of persuasion are: — (1) Sama (argument or expostulation), (2) Dana 
(inducement in the shape of gift etc.), (3) Bheda (sowing seeds of dissension) and (4) Danda (use of force). 
Hanuman must have told Sugrlva that apart from (1) moral obligations towards a friend and ally, (2) he owed 
his all to the grace of Sri Rama and was thus in duty bound to return His services, (3) that as a warrior he was 
no match for Sri Rama, who could punish him even as He did Vali, and (4) that He could win over Angada to 
His side and use him as a tool in dethroning Sugrlva. 

* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 751 
He bowed his head at Laksmana’s feet and made humble petition to him, 
whereupon Laksmana extended to him his protecting arms. When the report of Laksmana’s 
wrath reached the ears of the monkey lord (King Sugriva), he was terribly distracted with 
fear and said, “Listen, Hanuman: take Tara with you and with suppliant prayers appease 
the prince (Laksmana).” Hanuman accordingly went with Queen Tara and bowing at 
Laksmana’s feet recounted the Lord’s glory. With much supplication he escorted the 
prince to the palace and after laving his feet seated him on a couch. Then the monkey 
lord (Sugriva) bowed his head at the prince’s feet, while Laksmana took him by the arm 
and hugged him. “There is nothing so intoxicating, my lord, as the pleasures of sense 
which in an instant infatuate the soul even of a sage.” Laksmana was gratified to hear 
his humble speech and reassured him in many ways. The son of the wind-god told him 
all that had happened in the meantime, viz., how batches of spies had been despatched 
(in various directions). (1 — 5) 
Accompanied by Arigada and other monkey’s and placing Sri Rama’s younger 
brother at the head. King Sugriva went forth with joy and arrived in Sri Rama’s 
presence. (20) 


752 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 136
Bowing his head at Sri Rama’s feet he exclaimed with joined palms, “My lord, I am 
not at all to blame (for what I have done). Exceedingly powerful, O Lord, is Your Maya 
(deluding potency), which withdraws itself only when You, O Rama, show Your grace to 
a Jiva. Gods, men and sages, my master, are all slaves of their senses; while I am a 
vile brute and a monkey, the most libidinous of animals. A man who is not pierced by 
the shaft of a woman’s glances, nay, who remains wakeful even in the dark night of 
anger (who is not swayed by passion) and who is never caught in the meshes of greed, 
is as good as Yourself, O Lord of Raghus. It is a virtue which cannot be attained by 
personal endeavour; it is only by Your grace that one here and one there can acquire 
it.” Thereupon the Lord of Raghus smiled and said: “Brother, you are dear to me as 
Bharata. Now with all your heart make some organized effort whereby we may get 
tidings of Slta.” (1 — 4) 
While a talk was thus going on between them, multitudes of monkeys arrived. 
Legions of monkeys of various colours were visible in all the quarters. (21) 

* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 


753 
 (Says Sankara:) I saw the army of monkeys, Uma; he is indeed a fool who would 
try to count them. They came and bowed their head at Sri Rama’s feet and found their 
true lord in Him when they gazed on His countenance. In the whole host there was no 
monkey whose welfare Sri Rama did not personally enquire. This was no miracle for my 
master, the Lord of Raghus, who has taken all forms and is omnipresent. They stood in 
martial array as ordered and King Sugriva thus instructed them all: “I exhort and 
commission you to do Sri Rama’s work. Therefore, O monkey hosts, go forth in every 
direction and institute a search for Janaka’s Daughter, but you should all return in course 
of a month, my brethren, He who returns beyond this limit without any news shall meet 
his death at my hands.” (1 — 4) 
On hearing his command the monkeys proceeded at once in various directions. 
Sugriva then called Ahgada, Nala and Hanuman. (22) 
754 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Listen, O Nila, Arigada, Hanuman and Jambavan: you are all resolute of mind and 
wise. Proceed all of you, gallant warriors, together to the south and enquire of everyone 
you meet the whereabouts of Sita. Devise means though minds speech and action to 
trace Sita and thereby accomplish the object of Sri Ramacandra. (For warming oneself) 
one should wait upon the sun turning one’s back towards the same, while fire should be 
waited upon turning one’s breast towards it; but a master must be served with one’s whole 
being (in thought, word and deed) without resorting to any wiles. Similarly one should 
strive for (lasting happiness in) the other world by discarding the unrealities of the world. 
In this way all one’s woes incident to birth and death are eradicated. The consummation 
of human birth, brethren, lies in worshipping Sri Rama in a disinterested spirit. He is verily 
a man of flair and he alone is highly blessed, who is enamoured of Sri Rama’s feet.” 
Taking leave of Sugriva and bowing their head at his feet they joyously set out with their 
thoughts fixed on the Lord of Raghus. The last to make obeisance was Hanuman, (the 
son of the wind-god). The Lord knew that His work was going to be accomplished by him 
and therefore called him near. He stroked his head with His lotus hand and recognizing 
him to be His devotee gave him the ring off His finger. “Comfort Sita in various ways and 
return quickly after telling Her of my might and the agony of my heart due to separation 
from Her.” Hanuman felt that he had reaped the reward of his birth and departed with the 
image of the All-merciful enshrined in his heart. Although the Lord knew everything, the 
Protector of the gods, respected the recognized principles of statecraft (by sending spies 
in the first instance to trace out His lost spouse). (1 — 7) 
All the monkeys set forth ransacking woods, streams, lakes, hills and ravines with 
their mind wholly devoted to Sri Rama’s business and shaking off all attachment to their body. 
* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 


755 

Chapter 137
If at any place they came across some demon they would take his life by a single 
slap. They looked into every recess of forest and hill; and if they met any hermit they 
would all surround him. Presently they felt much oppressed with thirst; but water could 
be found nowhere and they also lost their way in the dense forest. Hanuman thought to 
himself that without water to drink all would die. Climbing a hill-top he looked all round 
and noticing a cavity in the ground saw a strange phenomenon there. Cakravakas, 
herons and swans hovered at its mouth and a number of other birds were making their 
way into it. Coming down the hill Hanuman (the son of the wind-god) took them all and 
showed them the cavern. They placed Hanuman at their head and entered the cave 
without further loss of time. (1 — 4) 
Going further they saw a lovely garden and a lake with many full-blown lotuses. 
There stood a beautiful temple close by, where sat a woman who was austerity 
incarnate. (24) 


756 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


From a distance all bowed their head to her and in response to her enquiry told 
her all about themselves. She then said, “Go and drink water and partake of beautiful and 
luscious fruits of various kinds.” They bathed and took some delicious fruits and all came 
once more to her. She related to them her own story from the beginning to the end and 
added, “I will now go and see the Lord of Raghus. Close your eyes and you will find 
yourself outside the cavern. You shall find Sita; you need not feel remorse.” The 
champions closed their eyes and looking again they found themselves standing on the 
sea-shore. She on her part went to the Lord of Raghus and drawing near to Him bowed 
her head at His lotus feet. She made supplication in diverse ways and the Lord granted 
to her unceasing Devotion. (1 —
Bowing to the Lord’s command she left for the forest of Badrinatha (in the 
Himalayas), cherishing in her heart Sri Rama’s feet, that are adored by the unborn 
Brahma as well as by Lord Sankara. (25) 
* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 757 

Chapter 138
On this side (standing on the sea-coast) the monkeys thought to themselves, “The 
time-limit (fixed by Sugriva) has expired, yet nothing has been done.” Sitting together 
they all said to one another, “Without obtaining any news (about Sita) what shall we gain 
by returning to Kiskindha either?” Said Arigada with eyes full of tears, “It is death for us 
both ways.* Here we have failed to get tidings of Sita and if we go home King Sugriva 
(the lord of monkeys) will behead us. He would have finished me immediately my father 
was killed, had not Sri Rama protected me; hence I owe no gratitude to him.” Again and 
again Arigada told them all, “Our death has arrived: there is no doubt about it.” When the 
monkey chiefs heard Ahgada’s words, they could make no answer and tears rolled from 
their eyes. For a moment they remained plunged in sorrow; but at last they spoke as 
follows: “We are not going to return without obtaining Sita’s news, O sagacious prince!” 
So saying all the monkeys went to the sea-shore and spreading Kusa grass there 
squatted on it. Seeing Ahgada’s distress Jambavan (the old bear chief) gave a highly 
instructive discourse. “Imagine not Rama to be a mortal, dear child; know Him to be the 
same as Brahma (the Supreme Spirit) without attributes, invincible and unborn. We, His 
servants, are all highly blessed in that we are ever devoted to the same Brahma 
endowed with a qualified form. (1 — 7) 
 “Of His own free will the Lord descends on earth for the sake of gods, Earth, cows 
and the Brahmanas. Spurning all the varieties of final beatitudef the worshippers of His 
qualified form (come down and) remain with Him even on earth.” (26) 
* Failure to do one’s allotted duty is worse than death to a hero like Arigada. It is in this sense that he 
speaks of death in either case. 

f Our Scriptures enumerate as many as six varieties of final beatitude. They are: (1) Salokya 
(residence in the abode of the supreme Deity), (2) Sarsti (sharing the powers, enjoyments and splendour of 
the Deity), (3) SamTpya (close proximity to the Deity in Heaven), (4) Sarupya (possessing a form exactly 
similar to the Deity), (5) Sayujya (absorption into the Deity) and (6) Identity with the attributeless and formless Brahma (the Absolute). 

758 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Thus they discoursed among themselves in many ways. Sampati* (Jatayu’s elder 
brother) heard them from his cave in the mountain. When he came out of it and saw a 
host of monkeys, he said to himself, “God has provided me with a feast: I will devour 
them all today. I have been starving for many days past and have never had a full meal; 
today God has supplied me with abundant food all at a time.” The monkeys trembled with 
fear to hear the vulture’s words. “Our doom is now sealed, we are sure,” they said to 
themselves. All the monkeys rose when they saw the vulture; while Jambavan felt much 
perturbed at heart. Arigada reflected within himself and said: “There is no one so blessed 
as Jatayu, who laid down his life in the service of Sri Rama and ascended to the abode 
of Sri Hari, supremely lucky as he was.” When the bird (Sampati) heard these words, 
which stirred in him a mixed feeling of joy and grief, he drew near to the monkeys, who 
felt alarmed by his presence. Assuring them of safety he went and enquired them about 
his younger brother and the monkeys told him the whole story. When Sampati heard of 
his brother’s obsequies (performed by the Lord with His own hands), he glorified the Lord 
of Raghus in many ways. (1 — 6) 

 “Take me to the sea-shore, so that I may make an offering of water with sesamum 
seeds (to my departed brother). I can help you only verbally, by following which you will 
succeed in recovering Her whom you seek.” (27) 

* We learn from Srimad Bhagavata and other scriptures that the sage Kasyapa, the progenitor of gods 
and demons as well as of the various sub-human species, begot two sons by Vinata (the mother of the 
feathered creation) — Aruna and Garuda by name. Of these Aruna serves as the charioteer of the sun-god, 
while Garuda was chosen by Bhagavan Visnu as His own mount. Aruna is the father of Sampati and Jatayu, 
who thus belonged to the earliest period of the world’s history. Their enormous size and uncommon strength, 
their astounding longevity and their speaking and behaving like human beings will therefore, cause little 
wonder when it is remembered that the world has steadily deteriorated since its creation. 



Chapter 139
* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 759 
Having performed the after-death ceremonies in respect of his departed brother 
(Jatayu) on the sea-shore Sampati narrated his own story. “Listen, O monkey chiefs: in 
the prime of our youth we two brothers (Jatayu and myself) soared in the heavens and 
approached the orb of the sun. Jatayu could not bear the heat of the sun and came back; 
but I in my pride advanced nearer the sun. My wings were scorched with the inordinate 
heat and I fell to the ground with a fearful scream. A sage, Candrama by name, (who 
lived there) was moved with compassion when he saw me. He taught me spiritual 
wisdom in many ways and rid me of my identification with the body. ‘In the Treta age the 
Supreme Spirit will take the form of a human being and the demon king (Ravana) will 
carry off His Spouse. The Lord will send out spies to search Her and you will be 
absolved of all sins by meeting them. Your wings will sprout again; worry not any longer 
on that account. You will have to do only this much: show where Slta may be them .’ The 
sage’s predictions has come true today; therefore, follow my instructions and set about 
the business of your Lord. On the summit of the Trikuta hill stands the city of Lanka; 
Ravana, who is fearless by nature, lives there. There, in the Asoka garden, is lodged Slta, 
who sits there, plunged in grief, even now. (1 — 6) 

760 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “I see Her, though you cannot; for the range of a vulture’s sight is unlimited. I have 
grown old now, or else I would have rendered some help to you.” (28) 
 “He who can cross over the ocean having a width of eight hundred miles and is 
a repository of intelligence will be able to do Sri Rama’s business. Look at me and take 
courage in your heart. See how rejuvenated I feel in body (with a new pair of wings) by 
Sri Rama’s grace. Even sinners who invoke Sri Rama’s Name are able to cross the vast 
and boundless ocean of mundane existence. You, therefore, who are His spies, should 
never lose nerve but be up and doing with the image of Sri Rama enshrined in your 
heart.” So saying, O Garuda! (Continues Kakabhusundi) the vulture departed, leaving 
them much amazed at heart. Now each one of the monkeys talked of his own strength, 
but doubted his ability to leap across. Said Jambavan (the king of bears), “I am now too 
old and not a particle of my former strength is left in my body. When Sri Rama, the Slayer 
of the demon Khara, assumed the form of Trivikrama (the Lord with three strides, Lord 
Vamana), I was young and possessed great strength. (1 — 4) 
 “In His effort to make Bali captive the Lord grew to an indescribable size. Yet in 
less than an hour I devoutly circumanbulated Him as many as seven times.” (29) 
* KISKINDHA-KANDA * 


761 
Said Arigada, “I will leap across; but I have some diffidence in my heart about my 
getting back.” Jambavan, however, interposed, “Even though you are competent in every 
way, how can we send you, the leader of us all?” The king of bears then turned towards 
Hanuman: “Listen, O mighty Hanuman: how is it that you are keeping mum? A son of the 
wind-god, you are as strong as your father and are a storehouse of intelligence, discretion 
and spiritual wisdom. What undertaking in this world is too difficult for you to accomplish, 
dear child? It is for the service of Sri Rama that you have come down upon earth.” The 
moment Hanuman heard these words he grew to the size of a mountain, with a body 
shining as gold and full of splendour as though he was another king of mountains (Sumeru). 
Roaring again and again like a lion he said, “I can easily spring across the salt ocean and 
killing Ravana with all his army can uproot the Trikuta hill and bring it here. But I ask you, 
Jambavan kindly tender me suitable advice.” “All that you have to do, my son, is to go 
and see Sita and come back with Her tidings. Then the lotus-eyed Sri Rama will recover 
Her by the strength of His arm taking with Him a host of monkeys for mere sport. (1 — 6) 

762 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 140

 “Taking with Him an army of monkeys Sri Rama will exterminate the demons and 
bring back Sita: and the gods as well as Narada and other sages will utter His praises, 
that sanctify the three spheres. A man who hears, sings, repeats or studies them will 
attain to the supreme state and Tulasidasa, who is devoted like a bee to the lotus feet 
of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line), ever sings them. 
Sri Rama, the slayer of the demon Trisira, will grant all the desires of those men 
and women who listen to Sri Rama’s praises, the remedy for the disease of transmigration. 
Listen to the praises of Sri Rama, who possesses a form dark as the blue lotus, who 
by His elegance extinguishes millions of Cupids and whose Name is a veritable fowler 
for birds in the shape of sins. (30 A-B) 
Thus ends the fourth descent into the Manasa lake of SrT Rama’s exploits, 
that eradicates all the impurities of the Kali age. 


