

(The Manasa lake containing the exploits of Sri Rama) 

Descent Five 

(Sundara-Kanda) 

Chapter 141
I adore the Lord of the universe bearing the name of Rama, the Chief of Raghu’s 
line and the crest-jewel of kings, the mine of compassion, the dispeller of all sins, 
appearing in human form through His Maya (deluding potency), the greatest of all gods, 
knowable through Vedanta (the Upanisads), constantly worshipped by Brahma (the 
Creator), Sambhu (Lord Siva) and Sesa (the serpent-god), the bestower of supreme 
peace in the form of final beatitude, placid, eternal, beyond the ordinary means of 
cognition, sinless and all-pervading. (1) 
There is no other craving in my heart, O Lord of the Raghus: I speak the truth and 




Chapter 142

You are the Spirit indwelling the hearts of all. Grant me intense devotion to Your feet, O 
crest-jewel of Raghus, and free my mind from faults like concupiscence etc. (2) 
I bow to the son of the wind-god, the beloved devotee of Sri Rama (the Lord of 
the Raghus), the chief of the monkeys, the repository of all virtues, the foremost among 
the wise, a fire to consume the forest of the demon race, possessing a body shining as 
a mountain of gold and a home of immeasurable strength. (3) 
Hanuman was much delighted at heart to hear the heartening speech of Jambavan. 
He said, “Suffering hardships and living on bulbs, roots and fruits, wait for me, brethren, till 
I return after seeing Sita. I am sure our object will be accomplished as I feel very cheerful.” 
So saying and after bowing his head to them all he set out full of joy with the image of Sri 
Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) enshrined in his heart. There was a beautiful hill on the sea- 
coast; he lightly sprang on to its top. And invoking the Hero of Raghus line again and again, 
the son of the wind-god took a leap with all his might. The hill on which Hanuman planted his 
foot while leaping sank down immediately into the nethermost region (Patala). Hanuman 
sped forth in the same way as the faili shaft of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). Knowing 
him to be Sri Rama’s emissary, the deity presiding over the ocean spoke to mount 
Mainaka,* “Relieve him of his fatigue, O Mainaka (by allowing him to rest on you).” (1 — 5) 
Hanuman simply touched the mountain with his hand and then made obeisance to 
it saying, “There can be no rest for me till I have accomplished Sri Rama’s work.” (1) 

* It is mentioned in our scriptures that formerly mountains had wings and could fly like birds, but 
later on Indra clipped them of their wings by his thunderbolt and since then they became stationary. 
Mainaka, however, who was able to accelerate his speed with the help of the wind-god, rushed into the 
ocean and hid himself under its waters. The deity presiding over the ocean, who had been begotten by 
King Sagara, and was thus an ancestor of the Lord, took this opportunity to oblige SrT Rama and directed 
Mainaka to come out of his hiding-place and give rest to His envoy in the mid-ocean so as to enable him 
to cross the ocean by easy stages. Out of gratitude to the ocean, who had afforded him shelter all the 
time, and in order to repay his obligation to the wind-god, Mainaka emerged from his asylum and served 
as a stepping-stone for Hanuman to rest on and replenish his store of energy. Hanuman, however, who 
was spurred on by his devotion to SrT Rama and depended on His all-sufficient grace, needed no other 
support and took leave of the mountain by merely acknowledging his services. The incident further shows 
Hanuman’s unremitting zeal in the service of his Lord. 



The gods saw the son of the wind-god sweeping along; and in order to test his 
extraordinary strength and intelligence they sent Surasa, a mother of serpents, who 
came near him and said: “The gods have provided me a meal today.” On hearing these 
words the son of the wind-god said in reply, “Let me return after accomplishing Sri 
Rama’s errand and tell my lord the news of Sita. Then I will approach you and enter 
your mouth; I tell you the truth. Mother, only let me go now.” When, however, she would 
not let him go on any account, Hanuman said, “Then why not devour me?” She 
distended her mouth to a distance of eight miles, while the chief of monkeys grew 
double the size of her mouth. She stretched her mouth to a circumference of a hundred 
and twenty-eight miles, and the son of the wind-god immediately took a form covering 
two hundred and fifty-six miles. Even as Surasa expanded her jaws the chief of the 
monkeys manifested a form twice as large as her mouth. When she further expanded 
her mouth eight hundred miles wide, the son of the wind-god assumed a very minute 
form, by which he entered her mouth and came out again and bowing his head to her 
begged leave to proceed. “I have gauged the extent of your wit and strength, the errand 
for which the gods had despatched me. (1 — 6) 
 “You will accomplish all the work of Sri Rama, a storehouse that you are of 
strength and intelligence.” Having blessed Hanuman she departed and Hanuman too 
joyfully resumed his journey (through the air). (2) 


There was a demoness who dwelt in the ocean and would catch the birds in the 
air by conjuring tricks. Seeing on the surface of the water the reflection of the creature 
that coursed in the air she would catch it and the bird was unable to move. In this way 
she would devour birds everyday. She employed the same trick against Hanuman, but 
the chief of monkeys at once saw through her game. The valiant son of the wind-god 
dispatched her and swept across the ocean, resolute of mind as he was. Reaching the 
other shore he gazed on the loveliness of the forest with the bees humming in quest of 
honey. Trees of various kinds looked charming with fruits and flowers; and he was 
particularly delighted at heart to see the numerous birds and beasts. Beholding a huge 
mountain ahead of him, he fearlessly ran up to its summit. The chief of the monkeys, O 
Lima (Parvati), deserved no credit for it: it was all attributable to the glory of the Lord, who 
devours Death himself. Climbing up the hill he surveyed Larika, a most marvellous 
fortress that defied description. It was very high and was enclosed by the ocean on all 
sides. The ramparts of gold shed great lustre all round. (1 — 6) 


Chapter 143

The charming city was enclosed by a fortification wall of gold inlaid with precious 
stones of various kinds, and contained many beautiful houses, cross roads, bazars, 
lovely streets and lanes, and was decorated in everyway. Who could count the 
multitudes of elephants, horses and mules, the crowds of foot soldiers and chariots and 
the troops of demons of every shape — a formidable host beyond all description ? Groves 
and orchards, gardens and parks, lakes and also wells, big and small, looked charming; 
daughters of human beings, Nagas, gods and Gandharvas (celestial musicians) enraptured 
with their beauty the minds of even hermits. Here roared mighty wrestlers endowed with 
huge mountainlike forms. They grappled with one another in many ways in different 
courts and challenged one another to a duel. Myriads of champions possessing frightful 
forms sedulously guarded the city on all sides. Elsewhere the vile demons feasted on 
buffaloes, human beings, cows, donkeys and goats. Tulasldasa has briefly told their 
story only because they will drop their bodies at holy place in the form of Sri Rama’s 
arrows and thereby attain the supreme state. (1 — 3) 
Seeing a host of guards defending the city, the chief of the monkeys thought to 
himself, “Let me assume a very minute form and enter the city at night.” (3) 


Hanuman assumed a form as small as a gnat and, invoking the Lord in human 
semblance (Bhagavan Sri Rama), headed towards Lanka. (At the gateway of Lanka) 
lived a demoness, Lankini by name. “Where should you be going heedless of me?” she 
said. “Fool, have you not been able to know who I am? Every thief hereabout is my food.” 
The great monkey dealt her such a blow with his fist that she toppled down vomiting 
blood. Then, recovering herself, Lanka (Lankini), stood up, and joining her palms in dismay, 
humbly addressed him, “When Brahma granted Ravana the boon he had asked for, the 
Creator furnished me with the following clue (to the extermination of the demon race) 
while departing: — ‘When you get discomfited by a blow from a monkey, know that all is 
over with the demon race.’ I must have earned very great merit, dear Hanuman, that I 
have been blessed with the sight of Sri Rama’s own messenger. (1 — 4) 
 “In one scale of the balance, dear son, put together the delights of heaven and the 
bliss of final beatitude; but they will all be outweighed by a moment’s joy derived from 
communion with the saints.” (4) 

Chapter 144

“Enter the city with the Lord of Ayodhya enshrined in your heart and accomplish 
all your business. Poison is transformed into nectar, foes turn friends, the ocean 
contracts itself to the size of a cow’s footprint, fire becomes cool and Mount Meru, O 
Garuda, appears like a grain of sand to him on whom Sri Rama has cast His benign 
look.” Hanuman assumed a very minute form and invoking Sri Rama entered the city. 
He ransacked every mansion and saw countless warriors here and there. Then he made 
his way into Ravana’s palace, which was marvellous beyond words. He saw the demon 
chief buried in sleep; but he did not find Videha’s Daughter there. He then noticed another 
splendid building, with a temple of Sri Hari standing apart. (1 — 4) 
The mansion had the weapons (bow and arrow) of Sri Rama painted on its walls 
and was beautiful beyond words. The monkey chief rejoiced to see clusters of young 
Tulasi plants there. (5) 
 “Lanka is the abode of a gang of demons; how could a pious man take up his 
residence here?” While the monkey chief was thus reasoning within himself, Vibhisana 
(Ravana’s youngest brother) woke up. He began to repeat Sri Rama’s name in prayer 
and Hanuman was delighted at heart to find a virtuous soul. “I shall make acquaintance 
with him at all events; for one’s cause would never suffer at the hands of a good man.” 
Having thus resolved he assumed the form of a Brahmana and accosted Vibhisana. As 
soon as he heard Hanuman’s words he rose and came where the latter was. Bowing 
low he enquired after the Brahmana’s welfare: “Tell me all about you, holy sir. Are you 
one of Sri Hari’s own servants (Narada and others)? My heart is filled with exceeding 
love at your sight. Or are you Sri Rama Himself, a loving friend of the poor, who have 
come to bless me (by your sight)?” (1 — 4) 
Thereupon Hanuman told him all about Sri Rama and disclosed his identity as well. 
The moment Vibhisana heard this a thrill ran through the body of both and they were 
transported with joy at the thought of Sri Rama’s host of virtues. (6) 

“Hear, O son of the wind-god, how I am living here: my plight is similar to that of 
the poor tongue, that lives in the midst of the teeth. Will the Lord of the solar race, dear 
friend, ever show His grace to me, knowing me to be masterless? Endowed as I am with 
a sinful (demoniac) form, I am incapable of doing any Sadhana (striving for God- 
Realization); and my heart cherishes no love for the Lord’s lotus-feet. But I am now 
confident, Hanuman, that Sri Rama will shower His grace on me; for one can never meet 
a saint without Sri Hari’s grace. It is only because the Hero of Raghu’s race has been 
kind to me that you have blessed me with your sight unsolicited.” “Listen, Vibhisana: the 
Lord is ever affectionate to His servants; for such is His wont. Tell me what superior birth 
can I claim — a frivolous monkey vile in everyway, so much so that if anyone mentions 
our name early in the morning he is sure to go without any food that day. (1 — 4) 

Chapter 145
 “Listen, my friend: though I am so wretched, the Hero of Raghu’s race has shown 
His grace even to me !” And his eyes filled with tears as he recalled the Lord’s virtues. ( 7 ) 
 “It is not to be wondered that those who knowingly forget such a lord and go adrift 
should be unhappy.” Thus recounting Sri Rama’s virtues, Hanuman derived unspeakable 
solace. Then Vibhisana fully narrated how Janaka’s Daughter had been living there. 
Thereupon Hanuman said, “Listen, brother: I should like to see Mother Sita:” Vibhisana 
fully explained to him the method of seeing Her and the son of the wind-god took leave 
of Vibhisana and proceeded on his errand. Assuming the same (minute) form as he had 
taken before, he repaired to the Asoka grove where Sita dwelt. He mentally bowed to Her 
as soon as he saw Her. Obviously She had been squatting away the hours of the night. 
Emaciated in body, She wore a single braid* of matted hair on Her head and repeated 
to Herself the list of Sri Rama’s excellences. ( 1 — 4 ) 
She had Her eyes fixed on Her own feet, while Her mind was absorbed in the 
* It is customary with Indian women to wear a single braid of hair when separated from their husband. 
thought of Sri Rama’s lotus feet. The son of the wind-god felt extremely miserable to see 
Janaka’s Daughter sad. (8) 
Concealing himself among the leaves of a tree he mused within himself, “Come, sir, 
what should I do?” At that very moment Ravana arrived there gaily adorned and 
accompanied by a troop of women. The wretch tried to prevail upon Her in many ways 
through friendly advice, allurements, threats and estrangement. Said Ravana, “Listen, O 
beautiful and wise lady: I will make Mandodari and all other queens your handmaids, I 
swear, provided you cast your look on me only once.” Interposing* a blade of grass 
between Herself and Ravana and fixing Her thoughts on Her most beloved lord (Sri 
Rama), the King of Ayodhya, Videha’s Daughter rejoined: “Listen, O ten-headed monster: 
can a lotus flower ever expand in the glow of a fire-fly?” “Ponder this at heart,” continued 
Janaka’s Daughter; “perhaps you have no idea what Sri Rama’s shafts are like, O 
wretch. You carried me off at a time when there was none by my side; yet you do not 
feel ashamed, O vile and impudent rogue!” (1 — 5) 

Hearing himself likened to a glow-worm and Sri Rama compared to the sun, and 
exasperated at Her harsh words, the monster drew out his sword and said: — (9) 

* According to the Hindu etiquette a lady must not talk to a male stranger without a medium Being 
forced to violate the above rule at this emergency Sita takes recourse to the aforesaid expedient. 

 “Sita, you have hurled on me an insult; I will cut off your head with my relentless 
sword. If not, obey my command at once; or else you lose your life, O beautiful lady.” 
“My lord’s arm is lovely as a string of blue lotuses and shapely and long as the trunk of 
an elephant, O ten-headed monster. Either that arm or your dreadful sword will have my 
neck: hear this my solemn vow, O fool. (Turning to Ravana’s glittering scimitar) Take 
away, O Candrahasa*, the burning anguish of my heart caused by the fire of separation 
from the Lord of the Raghus. You possess a cool, sharp and good blade; therefore, relieve 
the burden of my sorrow,” Sita said. On hearing these words he rushed forward to kill 
Her; it was Queen Mandodari (Maya’s daughter) who (intervened and) pacified him with 
words of good counsel. Summoning all the demonesses (posted there) he said, “Go and 
intimidate Sita in every way. If she does not accept my proposal in a month’s time I will 
draw my sword and behead her.” (1 — 5) 
(Having issued these instructions) the ten headed Ravana returned to his palace; 
* The word literally means “That which derides the moon by its cool brilliance’. Though generally 
used as a synonym for a curved sword, it particularly denotes the sword possessed by Ravana as a gift from 
Bhagavan Sankara, to whom it originally belonged. In Her utter despair Sita looked to Ravana’s sword alone 
to come to Her rescue and end Her miserable existence; and the sowrd, though cruel and dreadful to all 
appearance, appeared to Her as agreeable and soothing as the moon’s rays to a burning heart. The 
appellation ‘Candrahasa’ thus sounded most appropriate to Her. 

Chapter 146

while the host of fiendesses in the Asoka grove assumed various kinds of hideous forms 
and intimidated Sita. (10) 


One of these demonesses, Trijata by name, was devoted to Sri Rama’s feet and 
perfect in spiritual wisdom. She summoned all her companions, told them her dream and 
exhorted them to serve Sita and thus bless themselves. “In my dream a monkey burnt 
Lanka and the whole demon host was killed. As for the ten-headed Ravana, I saw him 
mounted on a donkey, all naked, with his heads shorn and his twenty arms chopped off. 
In this fashion he went his way to the south*; and it so appeared that Lanka had passed 
into the hands of Vibhisana. Sri Rama’s victory was proclaimed (by beat of drum) 
throughout the city: it was then that the Lord (Sri Rama) sent for Sita. This dream, I loudly 
proclaim, will come true a few days hence.” They were all dismayed to hear her words 
and fell at the feet of Janaka’s Daughter. (1 — 4) 

Then they all dispersed in various directions and Sita anxiously thought within 
Herself: “ At the end of a month this vile monster will slay me.”f (11) 
* The abode of Yama (the god of death) is believed to be in the south. That is why journey in a dream 
to the south is supposed to forebode death. 

f As appears from what follows, it is not death that Sita dreads, but the long interval of a month which 
has to elapse before Her threatened death. 

Chapter 147

With joined palms She said to Trijata, “Mother, you are my only companion in adversity. 
Therefore, quickly devise some means whereby I may be enabled to cast off this body; for 
this desolation, which is so hard to bear, can no longer be endured. Bring some wood and 
put up a pyre; and then, my mother, set fire to it. Thus prove the genuineness of my love for 
the Lord, O wise lady. Who will stand Ravana’s words, that pierce the ear like a shaft?” On 
hearing these words she clasped Sita’s feet and comforted Her by recounting the majesty, 
might and glory of Her lord. “Listen, O tender lady: no fire can be had at night.” So saying 
she left for her residence. Sita said (to Herself) “Heaven itself has turned hostile to me; 
there is no fire to be had and I cannot be cured of my agony otherwise. Sparks of fire are 
visibly seen in the heavens; but not a single star drops to the earth. The moon, though all 
fire, refuses to rain sparks, as if conscious of my wretchedness. Hear my prayer, O Asoka 
tree: take away my sorrow and answer to your name*. Your fresh and tender leaves bear 
the colour of flames; therefore, supply me with fire and do not aggravate my agony beyond 
limits.” The moment seemed like an agef to Hanuman as he beheld Slta extremely distressed 
due to Her separation from Her lord. (1 — 6) 
* The word ‘Asoka’ literally means that which ends sorrow. 

f Literally speaking, the word ‘Kalpa’ denotes the span of life of the universe, which has been 
calculated to cover 4,32,00,000 years. 

Chapter 148

Then, taking thought within himself, Hanuman (the monkey chief) dropped down the 
signet ring, as though the Asoka tree had thrown an ember (in response to Her prayer). 
She sprang up with joy and took it in Her hand. (12) 
Now She saw the charming ring with the name of Sri Rama most beautifully 
engraved on it. Recognizing the ring She looked at it with wonder and was agitated at 
heart with a mixed feeling of joy and sorrow. “Who can conquer the invincible Lord of 
the Raghus and such a (divine) ring cannot be prepared through Maya ( a conjuring 
trick).” As Sita thus indulged in fancies of various kinds, Hanuman spoke in honeyed 
accents and began to recount Sri Ramacandra’s praises. The moment they reached 
Sita’s ears Her grief took flight. She listened with all Her soul and ears while Hanuman 
narrated the whole story from the very beginning. “Wherefore does he who has told this 
tale, which is like nectar to my ears, not reveal himself?*” Thereupon Hanuman drew near 
Her, while Sita sat with her back turned towards him, full of amazement. “I am Sri Rama’s 
messenger, mother Janaki: I solemnly swear by the all-merciful Lord Himself. This ring 


* Obviously the orchard in which Sita had been confined was open to the fair sex alone. Naturally, 
therefore, when She heard an unseen voice utter Sri Rama’s praises, She concluded that it must be some 
female. 



has been brought by me, 0 mother; Sri Rama gave it to me as a token for you.” “Tell 
me what brought about this fellowship between men and monkey.” Then Hanuman 
explained the circumstances in which a union was brought about between men and 
monkeys. (1 — 6) 

As She heard the monkey’s affectionate words she had an inclination to belive him and 
She know him to be a servant of the all-merciful Lord in thought, word and deed. (13) 
Perceiving him to be a devotee of Sri Hari She developed an intense affection for 
him. Her eyes filled with tears and a thrill ran through Her body. “To me who was being 
drowned in the ocean of desolation, dear Hanuman, you have come as a veritable bark. 
Now tell me, I adjure you, the welfare of all-blissful Sri Rama (the Slayer of Khara) and 
His younger brother (Laksmana). Wherefore has the tender-hearted and compassionate 
Lord of the Raghus become so hard-hearted? Does the Chief of the Raghus ever 
remember me — He who is by natural disposition a source of delight to His servants ? Will 
my eyes, dear Hanuman, be ever gladdened by the sight of His swarthy and delicate 
limbs?” Words failed Her and Her eyes swam with tears. “Ah, my lord ! You have entirely 
forgotten me.” Seeing Sita sore distressed due to Her separation from Her lord, Hanuman 
addressed Her in soft and polite accents: “The Lord and His younger brother (Laksmana) 
are both doing well, mother, except for the fact that the all-merciful is sorrowful because 
of Your sorrow. Do not feel vexed at heart, mother; Sri Rama loves You twice as much 
as You love Him. (1 — 5) 
 “Mother, compose Yourself now and hear the message of Sri Rama (the Lord of 
the Raghus).” Even as he uttered these words, the monkey’s voice was choked with 
emotion and his eyes filled with tears. (14) 
 “Sri Rama said: Ever since I have been separated from you, Sita, everything to 
me has become its very reverse. The fresh and tender leaves on the trees look like 
tongues of fire; nights appear as dreadful as the night of final dissolution and the moon 
scorches like the sun. Beds of lotuses are like so many spears planted on the ground, 
while rain-clouds pour boiling oil as it were. Those that were friendly before, have now 
become tormenting; the cool, soft and fragrant breezes are now like the hissing serpent. 
One’s agony is assuaged to some extent even by speaking of it; but to whom shall I speak 
about it? For there is no one who will understand. The reality about the chord of love that 






780 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


binds you and me, dear, is known to my mind alone; and my mind ever abides with you. 
Know this to be the essence of my love.” Videha’s Daughter was so absorbed in love the 
moment She heard the Lord’s message, that She lost all consciousness of Her body. Said 
the monkey, “Mother, collect Yourself, and fix Your thoughts on Sri Rama, the delight of 
His servants. Reflect on the glory of the Lord of the Raghus and shake off all faint- 
heartedness upon my word.” (1 — 5) 
 “The hosts of demons are like so many moths, while the shafts of the Lord of the 
Raghus are like flames. Have courage in Your heart, mother, and take the demons as 
consumed.” (15) 
 “Had the Hero of Raghu’s line any news about You, the Lord of the Raghus would 
not have tarried. The moment Sri Rama’s arrows make their appearance like the sun, the 
demon host would be scattered like the shadows of night. Mother, I would take You to 
Him this very moment; but, I swear by Rama, I have no such orders from the Lord. 
Therefore, wait patiently for some days more, mother, till the Hero of Raghu’s line arrives 
with the troops of monkeys. Slaughtering the demons, He will take You away; while 
Narada and the other sages will glorify Him in all the three spheres of creation.” “But, my 
son, all the monkeys must be pygmies like you, whereas the demons are mighty and 
great warriors. I have grave misgivings in my heart on this score.” On hearing this the 




* SUNDARA-KANDA * 781 


monkey revealed His real form, colossal as a mountain of gold, terrible in battle, 
possessing great might and full of valour. Sita now took comfort in Her heart and the son 
of the wind-god thereupon resumed his diminutive appearance. (1 — 5) 

“Listen, mother: monkeys possess no great strength or intelligence either; but, 
through the Lord’s might, the most tiny snake might swallow Garuda (the king of birds 
and the mount of Bhagavan Visnu).” 
“Sita felt gratified at heart even as She heard the monkey’s words full of devotion 
and revealing Sri Rama’s majesty, glory and strength. Recognizing him as the beloved 
of Sri Rama She gave him Her blessing: “May you become a repository of strength and 
virtue, dear son. May you ever remain immune from old age and death and prove to be 
a storehouse of good qualities, my son; and may the Lord of the Raghus shower His 
abundant grace on you.” The moment the words “May the Lord be gracious to you” 
reached his ears Hanuman was utterly overwhelmed with emotion. Again and again the 
monkey bowed his head at Her feet and with joined palms addressed Her thus: “I have 
now accomplished all that I had to accomplish, my mother; for your blessing, everyone 
knows, is unfailing. Listen, mother: I am feeling frightfully hungry at the sight of these 
trees laden with delicious fruits.” “I tell you, my son, this grove is guarded by most valiant 
and mighty demons.” “Mother, I am not at all afraid of them, only if I have your hearty 
approval.” (1 — 5) 

Chapter 149

Seeing the monkey perfect in strength and wit, Janaka’s Daughter said, “ Go, my 
son, and enjoy the luscious fruit with your heart fixed on Sri Rama’s feet.” (17) 

Bowing his head he went forth and entered the grove; and having eaten the 
fruit he began to break down the trees. A number of warriors had been posted there 
as guards; some of them were killed by him, while the rest took flight and cried for 
help, “O lord, a huge monkey has made his appearance and laid waste the Asoka 
grove. He has eaten fruits, uprooted trees, and, having crushed the watchmen, has 
laid them on the ground.” On hearing this, Ravana despatched a number of his 
champions. Hanuman roared when he saw them and slaughtered the whole demon 
host. A few that had survived though well-nigh killed, escaped screaming. Ravana then 
sent prince Aksa, who sallied forth with a vast number of his best warriors. Seeing 
them approach, Hanuman seized a tree and threatened them and, having overthrown 
the prince, roared with a loud yell. (1 — 4) 

Some he slew, some he crushed and some he seized and pounded with dust. And 
some who escaped cried, “O lord, the monkey is too strong for us.” (18) 




* SUNDARA-KANDA * 783 

The King of Larika flew into a rage when he heard of his son’s death and sent the 
mighty Meghanada. “Kill him not, my son, but bind him. Let us see the monkey and 
ascertain wherefrom he comes.” Meghanada (the conqueror of Indra) sallied forth, a 
peerless champion, seized with fury at the news of his brother’s death. When Hanuman 
saw this fierce warrior approach, he gnashed his teeth and with a roar rushed forward 
to meet him. He tore up a tree of enormous size and smashed with it the car, thus 
rendering the crown prince of Larika without chariot. As for the mighty warriors who 
accompanied him, Hanuman seized them one by one and crushed them by the weight 
of his limbs. Having finished them off, he closed with Meghanada. It was like the 
encounter of two lordly elephants. Striking the opponent with his clenched fist, Hanuman 
sprang and climbed up a tree; while Meghanada lay unconscious for a moment. He rose 
again and resorted to many a delusive device; but the son of the wind-god was not to 
be vanquished. (1 — 5) 
Meghanada ultimately fitted to his bow the arrow known as Brahmastra (the weapon 
presided over by Brahma), when Hanuman thought within himself: “If I submit not to Brahma’s 
own weapon, its infinite glory will be cast to the winds. (1 9) 



He launched the Brahmastra against Hanuman, who crushed a whole host even 
as he fell. When he saw that the monkey had swooned, he entangled the latter in 
a noose of serpents* and carried him off. Now, Parvati, is it conceivable that the envoy 
of the Lord whose very name enables the wise to cut asunder the bonds of mundane 
existence should come under bondage? No, it was in the service of the Lord that 
Hanuman allowed himself to be bound. When the demons heard that the monkey had 
been captured and noosed, they all rushed to the court in order to enjoy the spectacle. 
The monkey arrived and saw Ravana’s court: his superb glory baffled description. Even 
gods and regents of the quarters stood meek with joined palms, all watching the 
movement of his eyebrows in great dismay. But the monkey’s mind was no more disturbed 
at the sight of his power than Garuda (the king of birds) would be frightened in the 
midst of a number of serpents. (1 — 4) 
When the ten-headed monster saw the monkey he laughed and railed at him. But 
presently he recalled his son’s death and felt sad at heart. (20) 
* A special contrivance to entangle the enemy, possessed by Varuna (the god presiding over the 
waters) and evidently snatched from the latter by Ravana. 

Chapter 150

Said the king of Lanka, “Who are you, monkey, and by whose might have you 
wrought the destruction of the grove? What, did you never hear my name? I see you are 
an exceptionally bold wretch. For what offence did you kill the demons? Tell me, fool, are 
you not afraid of losing your life?” “Listen, Ravana: recall Him by whose might Maya 
(Nature) brings forth numberless universes; by whose might, O ten-headed monster, 
Brahma, Hari (Visnu) and Isa (Siva) carry on their respective function of creation, 
preservation and destruction; by whose might the thousand-headed serpent (Sesa) 
supports on his head the entire globe with its mountains and forests, who assumes 
various forms in order to protect the gods and teach a lesson to wretches like you; who 
broke Siva’s unbending bow and crushed with it the pride of a host of princes; who 
despatched Khara, Dusana, Trisira and ValT, all unequalled in strength. (1 — 5) 

 “By an iota of whose might you were able to conquer the entire creation, both 
animate and inanimate, and whose beloved spouse has been stolen away by you. Know 
me to be His envoy.” (21) 



“I am aware of your glory: you had an encounter with Sahasrabahu* and won 
distinction in your contest with Vali.f” Ravana heard the words of Hanuman but laughed 
them away. “I ate the fruit because I felt hungry and broke the boughs as a monkey is 
wont to do. One’s body, my master, is supremely dear to all; yet those wicked fellows 
would insist on belabouring me, so that I had no course left but to return their blows. Still 
your son (Meghanada) put me in bonds; but I am not at all ashamed of being bound, keen 
as I am to serve the cause of my lord. I implore you with joined palms, Ravana: give up 
your haughtiness and heed my advice. Think of your lineage and view things in that 
perspective; in any case disillusion yourself and adore Him who dispels the fear of His 
devotees. Never antagonize Him who is a source of terror even to Death, that devours 
all created beings, both animate and inanimate, gods as well as demons. And return 
Janaka’s Daughter at my request. (1 — 5) 

“Lord Sri Rama, the Slayer of Khara, is a protector of the suppliant and an ocean 
of compassion. Forgetting your offences, He will give you shelter if you but turn to Him 
for protection. (22) 
* (Vide Lanka-Kanda 23, 8) 

f Once upon a time, when Vali was performing his Sandhya, Ravana sought to capture him by 
stealing behind him. Vali, however, got scent of his mischievous intention; and the moment Ravana 
approached Vali the latter caught hold of him and held him secure in his arm-pit till he had finished his 
Sandhya and Tarpana (offering water to the manes). Ravana remained in that position for six months till at last 
Brahma himself came to his rescue and secured his release. 




* SUNDARA-KANDA * 


787 

 “Install the image of Sri Rama’s lotus feet in your heart and enjoy the uninterrupted 
sovereignty of Lanka. The glory of the sage Pulastya (your grandfather) shines like the 
moon without its spot; be not a speck in that moon. Speech is charmless without Sri 
Rama’s name. Ponder and see for yourself, casting aside arrogance and infatuation. A 
fair lady without clothes, O enemy of gods, does not a look herself even though adorned 
with all kinds of jewels. The fortune and lordship of a man who is hostile to Rama 
eventually leave him even if they stay a while, and are as good as lost if acquired anew. 
Rivers that have no perennial source get dried up as soon as the rains are over. Listen, 
O ten-headed Ravana, I tell you on oath: there is none to save him who is opposed to 
Sri Rama. Sankara, Visnu and Brahma* in their thousands are unable to protect you, an 
enemy of Sri Rama.” (1 — 4) 
 “Abandon pride, which is the same as Tamoguna (darkness), rooted as it is in 
ignorance and is a source of considerable pain; and adore Lord Sri Rama, the Chief of 
the Raghus and an ocean of compassion.” (23) 
* Brahma, Visnu and Siva are spoken of here as part manifestations of the Supreme Deity, responsible 
for the creation etc., of only one of the countless millions of universes ruled over by Sri Rama, who represents 
the Supreme Deity. 

Chapter 151

Although Hanuman gave him exceedingly salutary advice, full of devotion, discretion, 
dispassion and wisdom, the most haughty Ravana laughed and said, “We have found a 
most wise Guru in this monkey! (Turning towards Hanuman he continued) Death hangs 
over your head, O wretch; that is why you have started exhorting me, O vile monkey.” 
“Just the contrary is going to happen;” retorted Hanuman. “I clearly perceive that you are 
labouring under some mental illusion.” Hearing these words of Hanuman Ravana got nettled. 
“Why not some of you quickly kill this fool?” As soon as the demons heard it, they rushed 
forward to kill him. That very moment came Vibhisana (Ravana’s youngest brother) with 
his counsellors. Bowing his head he made humble entreaty: “It is against all statecraft: an 
envoy must not be killed. He may be punished in some other way, my master.” All exclaimed 
to one another, “This is sound counsel, brother.” Hearing this the ten-headed Ravana laughed 
and said, “All right, the monkey may be sent back mutilated. (1 — 5) 
“A monkey is very fond of his tail: I tell you this secret. Therefore, swathe his tail with rags soaked in oil and then set fire to it.” (24) 

* SUNDARA-KANDA * 789 
 “When the tailless monkey will go back, the wretch will bring his master with him, 
and I shall have an opportunity of seeing his might, whom he has so lavishly exalted.” 
Hanuman smiled to himself on hearing these words. “Goddess Sarada has proved 
helpful to me, I believe.” On hearing Ravana’s command the stupid demons started doing 
as they were bid. Not a rag was left in the city nor a drop of ghee (clarified butter) or 
oil, the tail had grown to great a length through Hanuman’s playful gesture. The citizens 
thronged to see the fun; they kicked Hanuman and jeered much at him. With beating of 
drums and clapping of hands they took him round the city and then set fire to his tail. 
When Hanuman saw the fire blazing, he immediately assumed an utterly diminutive size, 
and slipping out of his bonds sprang to the attics of the gold palace, to the dismay of the 
demonesses. (1 — 5) 

At that moment, impelled by God, all the forty-nine* winds began to bluster. 
Hanuman roared with a loud laugh and swelled to such a size that he seemed to touch 
the sky. (25) 
* Our scriptures tell us that there are forty-nine varieties of winds, each presided over by a distinct god, 
these gods being collectively known as the Maruts. In the ordinary course it is only at the time of universal 
dissolution (w*t) that all these winds are let loose by the god of destruction. 




790 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Though colossal in size, Hanuman appeared most nimble-bodied; he ran and 
sprang from palace to palace. The city was all ablaze and the people were at their wit’s 
end. Terrible flames burst forth in myriads and piteous cries were heard everywhere: 
“O father ! Ah, my mother ! Who will save us at this hour? As I said, he is no monkey 
but some god in the form of a monkey. Such is the result of despising a noble soul: 
the city is being consumed by fire as though it had no master.” In the twinking of an 
eye Hanuman burnt down the whole city barring the solitary house of Vibhisana. 
Parvati, (continues Lord Siva,) Hanuman went unscathed because he was the 
messenger of Him who created fire itself. He burnt the whole of Lanka from one end 
to the other and then leapt into the ocean. (1 — 4) 

Chapter 152
After quenching his tail and relieving his fatigue he resumed his diminutive form 
and stood before Janaka’s Daughter with joined palms. (26) 
 “Be pleased, Mother, to give me some token, such as the Lord of the Raghus gave 
me.” She thereupon unfastened the jewel on Her head and gave it to the son of the wind- 
god, who gladly received it. “Convey my obeisance to Him, dear son, with these words: 
‘My lord is all sufficient; yet recalling Your vow of kindness to the afflicted, relieve, O 
master, my grievous distress.’ Repeat to him, my son, the episode of Indra’s son 
(Jayanta) and remind the Lord of the might of His arrows. If the Lord does not arrive here 
within a month, he will not find me alive. Tell me, Hanuman, how can I preserve my life; 
for you too, my son, now speak of going. Your sight had brought relief to my heavy heart: 
I have before me now the same dreary days and weary nights.” (1 — 4) 

791 
Reassuring Janaka’s Daughter he consoled Her in many ways and, bowing his 
head at Her lotus feet, set forth to meet Sri Rama. (27) 
While leaving he roared aloud with such a terrible noise that the wives of the demons 
miscarried. Taking a leap across the ocean he reached the opposite shore and greeted 
his fellow-monkeys with a shrill cry of joy. They were all delighted to see Hanuman and 
felt as if they had been born anew. He wore a cheerful countenance and his body shone 
with a brilliance which left no doubt in their mind that he had executed Sri Ramacandra’s 
commission. They all met him and felt as delighted as a fish writhing with agony for lack 
of water would feel on getting it. They then gladly proceeded to see the Lord of the Raghus, 
asking and telling the latest events. On their way they all entered Sugriva’s garden called 
Madhuvana and with Angada’s consent began to eat the luscious fruit. When the guards 
interfered, they were beaten with fists till they took to their heels. (1 — 4) 
They all approached Sugriva and complained that the Crown Prince was laying 
waste the royal garden. Sugriva rejoiced to hear this; for he concluded that the monkeys 
must have returned after accomplishing the Lord’s business. (28) 



Chapter 153

 “If they had failed to get any news of Sita, they could never dare to eat the fruit 
of Madhuvana.” While the king was thus musing, the monkey chiefs arrived with their 
party. Drawing near they all bowed their head at his feet and the lord of the monkeys 
received them all most cordially and enquired after their welfare. “It is well with us, now 
that we have seen your feet. By Rama’s grace the work has been accomplished with 
remarkable success. It is Hanuman, Your Majesty, who did everything and saved the life 
of the whole monkey host.” Hearing this Sugriva embraced him again and then 
proceeded with all the monkeys to see the Lord of the Raghus. When Sri Rama saw the 
monkeys approaching with their mission duly accomplished, He was extraordinarily 
delighted at heart. The two brothers were seated on a crystal rock and all the monkeys 
went and fell at Their feet. (1 — 4) 
The all-merciful Lord of the Raghus embraced them all with affection and asked 
of their welfare. “All is well with us, now that we have seen Your lotus feet.” (29) 

793 
Said Jambavan, “Listen, O Lord of the Raghus: he on whom You bestow Your 
blessings, is ever lucky and incessantly happy; gods, human beings and sages are 
all kind to him. He alone is victorious, modest and an ocean of virtues; his fair renown 
shines brightly through all the three spheres of creation. Everything has turned out 
well by the grace of my Lord; today our birth has been consummated. The achievement 
of Hanuman (the son of the wind-god) cannot be described even with a thousand 
tongues.” Jambavan then related to the Lord of the Raghus the charming exploits 
of Hanuman (the son of the wind-god). The All-merciful felt much delighted at 
heart to hear them and in His joy He clasped Hanuman once more to His bosom. 
“Tell me, dear Hanuman, how does Janaka’s daughter pass her days and sustain her 
life?” (1—4) 

“Your Name keeps watch night and day, while Her continued thought of You acts 
as a pair of closed doors. She has Her eyes fastened on Her own feet; Her life thus finds 
no outlet whereby to escape.” (30) 
794 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “When I was leaving, She gave me this jewel from the top of Her head.” The Lord 
of the Raghus took it and pressed it to His bosom. “My lord, with tears in both Her eyes 
Janaka’s Daughter uttered the following few words: ‘Embrace the feet of my lord and His 
younger brother; O befriender of the distressed, reliever of the suppliant’s agony, I am 
devoted to Your feet in thought, word and deed; yet for what offence, my lord, have You 
forsaken me? I do admit one fault of mine, that my life did not depart the moment I was 
separated from You. That, however, my lord, is the fault of my eyes, which forcibly prevent 
my life from escaping. The agony of separation from You is like fire, my sighs fan it as 
a gust of wind and in between stands my body like a heap of cotton, which would have 
been consumed in an instant. But my eyes, in their own interest (i.e. , for being enabled 
to feast themselves on Your beauty) rain a flood of tears; that is why the body fails to 
catch the fire of desolation.’ Sita’s distress is so overwhelmingly great, and You are so 
compassionate to the afflicted, that it is better not to describe it.” (1 — 5) 
 “Each single moment, O fountain of mercy, passes like an age to Her. Therefore, march quickly, my lord, and vanquishing recover Her.” 

795 
When the all-blissful Lord heard of Sita’s agony, tears rushed to his lotus eyes. “Do 
you think anyone who depends on me in thought, word and deed can ever dream of 
adversity?” Said Hanuman: “There is no misfortune other than ceasing to remember and 
adore You. Of what account are the demons to You? Routing the enemy You will surely 
bring back Janaka’s Daughter.” “No one endowed with a body — a god, human being or 
sage — has put me under such obligation, Hanuman, as you have done. Even my mind 
shrinks to face you; how, then, can I repay your obligation? Listen, my son: I have thought 
over the question and concluded that the debt which I owe you cannot be repaid.” Again 
and again as the Protector of the gods gazed on Hanuman His eyes filled with tears and 
His body was overpowered with a thrill of emotion. (1 — 4) 
Even as Hanuman listened to the words of his lord and gazed on His countenance 
he experienced a thrill of joy all over his body and fell at His feet, overwhelmed with love 
and crying: “Save me, save me (from the tentacles of egoism), my lord.” (32) 
Again and again the Lord sought to raise him up; he, however, was so absorbed 
in love that he would not rise. The lotus hand of the Lord rested on his head. Gauri’s lord
(Siva) was overcome with emotion as He called to mind Hanuman’s enviable lot.* But, 
recovering Himself, Siva resumed the most charming narrative. The Lord lifted up 
Hanuman and clasped him to His bosom; then He took him by the hand and seated him 
very close to Him. “Tell me, Hanuman, how could you burn Ravana’s stronghold of 
Lanka, a most impregnable fortress?” When Hanuman found the Lord so pleased, he 
replied in words altogether free from pride. “A monkey’s greatest valour lies in his 
skipping about from one bough to another. That I should have been able to leap across 
the ocean, burn the gold city, kill the demon host and lay waste the Asoka grove was 
all due to Your might; no credit, my lord, is due to me for the same.” (1 — 5) 
 “Nothing is unattainable, my lord, to him who enjoys Your grace. Through Your 
might a mere shred of cotton can surely burn a submarine fire (the impossible can be 
made possible).” (33) 

Chapter 154
 “Therefore, be pleased, my lord, to grant me unceasing Devotion, which is a 
source of supreme bliss.” When the Lord, O Parvati, heard the most artless speech of 
Hanuman He said, “Be it so !” Uma , he who has come to know the true nature of Rama 
can have no relish for anything other than His worship. Even he who takes this dialogue 
(between Sri Rama and Hanuman) to heart is blessed with devotion to Sri Rama’s feet. 
On hearing the words of the Lord the whole host of monkeys cried, “Glory, glory, all glory 

* It should be remembered in this connection that Lord Siva Himself had taken the form of Hanuman. 
It was, therefore, easy for Him to recall that thrilling experience. 

to the gracious Lord, the fountain of bliss !” The Lord of the Raghus then summoned 
Sugriva (the King of the monkeys) and said, “Make preparations for the march. Why 
should we tarry any longer? Issue orders to the monkeys at once.” The gods who were 
witnessing the spectacle rained down flowers in profusion and then gladly withdrew from 
the lower air to their own celestial spheres. (1 — 4) 
Sugriva (the lord of the monkeys) quickly summoned the commanders of the 
various troops and they presented themselves in multitudes. The troops of monkeys and 
bears, varying in colour, were all unequalled in strength. (34) 
The mighty bears and monkeys bowed their head at the Lord’s lotus feet and 
roared. Sri Rama surveyed the whole monkey host and cast on them His gracious 
lotus-like eyes. Getting more power from His grace the monkey chiefs vied as it were 
with huge mountains equipped with wings. Sri Rama then sallied forth glad of heart 
and many were the delightful and auspicious omens that occurred to Him. It was in 
the fitness of things that good omens should appear at the time of His departure (on 
an expedition) whose glory itself embodies all blessings. Videha’s Daughter came to 
798 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
know of the Lord’s march; the throbbing of Her left limbs apprised Her of the same 
as it were. But what were good omens for Janaka’s Daughter foreboded evil for Ravana.* 
Who could adequately describe the army as it marched with its countless monkeys and 
bears roaring. With no weapon other than their sharp claws, they carried rocks and 
trees (that they had uprooted on the way) and marched now in the air and now on 
land, for they had unhampered motion everywhere. The bears and monkeys roared like 
lions as they marched, while the elephants guarding the eight cardinal points shook 
and trumpeted. (1 — 5) 

The elephants of the eight cardinal points trumpeted, the earth rocked, the 
mountains trembled and the oceans were agitated. The Gandharvas, gods, sages, 
Nagas and Kinnaras, all felt delighted at heart to perceive that their troubles were over. 
Myriads of formidable monkey warriors gnashed their teeth (in a bellicose mood); while 
many more millions dashed forward crying “Glory to Sri Rama, Kosala’s lord, of mighty 
valour” and hymning His praises. Even the great lord of serpents (Sesa) found himself 
unable to bear the crushing weight of the belligerent troops and felt dizzy again and 
again. But each time he would struggle by clutching with his teeth the hard shell of the 
divine Tortoise. The scratches thus made by his teeth would make one imagine as if, 
knowing the departure of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) on His glorious expedition 
to be a most attractive theme, the serpent-king was inscribing its immortal and sacred 
story on the Tortoise’s back. (1-2) 


* According to the science of omens (which was most developed in this country in the remote past) the 
throbbing of left limbs is considered as auspicious for women but inauspicious for men. 





Continuing His march in this way the All-merciful arrived at the seashore and halted 
there. The host of valiant bears and monkeys began to guttle fruits all round there. (35) 

Chapter 155

Ever since Hanuman left after burning down Larika the demons there had lived in 
constant terror. In their own houses they thought, “There is no hope for the demon race 
now. If his messenger was mighty beyond words, what good would result when the 
master himself enters the city?” When Mandodari (Ravana’s principal queen) heard from 
her female spies what the citizens were saying, she felt much perturbed. Meeting her lord 
in seclusion she fell at his feet and with joined palms addressed to him words steeped 
in wisdom: “My lord, avoid all strife with Sri Hari. Take my words to your heart as a most 
salutary advice. My lord, if you seek your own welfare, call one of your ministers and 
send back with him the consort of that prince (Sri Rama), the very thought of whose 
messenger’s doings makes the wives of the demons miscarry. Just as a frosty night 
spells disaster to a bed of lotuses, so Sita has come here as a bane to your race. Listen, 
my lord: unless you return Sita, not even Sambhu (Lord Siva) and Brahma (the creator) 
can be of any good to you. (1 — 5) 

“Rama’s arrows are like a swarm of serpents, while the demon host can only compare with frogs. Therefore, giving up obstinacy, devise some means of safety before the serpents devour them.” 
When the foolish Ravana, who was known all the world over for his haughtiness, 
heard Mandodari’s admonition, he roared with laughter, “A woman is timorous by nature, 
it is truly said. She entertains fear even on an auspicious occasion; for her mind is very 
weak. If the monkey host comes, the poor demons would feast on them and sustain 
themselves. The very guardians of the spheres tremble for fear of me; how ridiculous 
that you, my wife, should be afraid!” So saying he laughed and embraced her and then 
left for his council-chamber exhibiting great fondness for her. Mandodari, however, felt 
troubled at heart and thought that heaven had turned against her lord. As he occupied 
his royal seat in the council-chamber, he received intelligence that all the invading host 
had arrived on the other side of the ocean. He thereupon asked his councillors; “Give 
me proper advice.” They however, laughed and submitted, “Only remain quiet, my lord. 
Your Majesty experienced no difficulty when you conquered the gods and demons. Of 
what account, then, can men and monkeys be?” (1 — 5) 

Chapter 157
When a minister, a physician and a religious preceptor — these three use pleasing 
words from fear or hope of reward, the result is that dominion, health and faith — all the three forthwith go to the dogs. 
It was such a contingency that presented itself before Ravana. They all extolled 
him only to his face. Perceiving it to be an opportune hour, Vibhisana (Ravana’s 
youngest brother) arrived and bowed his head at his brother’s feet. Bowing his head 
once more, he occupied his own seat and, when ordered to speak, addressed him thus: 
“Since Your gracious Majesty has asked me my opinion I tender it, dear brother, 
according to my own lights and in your own interest. Let him who seeks after his welfare, 
good reputation, wisdom, a good destiny after his death and joys of various kinds, turn 
his eyes away from the brow of another’s wife even as one should refuse to see the 
moon on the fourth night (of the bright half) of a lunar month. Even though a man 
happened to be the sole lord of the fourteen spheres, he would certainly fall if he turned 
hostile to living beings. No one will speak well of a man who has the slightest avarice 
even if he were an ocean of virtues and clever too. (1 — 4) 

“Lust, anger, vanity and covetousness are all paths leading to hell. Abjuring, all 
these adore the Hero of Raghu’s line, whom saints worship. (38) 

Sri Rama, dear brother, is no mere human king; He is the Lord of the universe and 
the Death of Death himself. He is the Brahma (Absolute) who is free from the malady 
of Maya, the unborn God, all-pervading, invincible, without beginning or end. An ocean 
of compassion, He has assumed the form of a human being for the good of Earth, the 
Brahmana, the cow and the gods. Listen, brother: He delights His devotees and breaks 
the ranks of the impious and is the champion of the Vedas and true religion. Giving up 
enmity with Him, bow your head to Him; for the Lord of the Raghus relieves the distress 
of those who seek refuge in Him. My master, restore Videha’s Daughter to the Lord Sri 
Rama, and adore Him, the disinterested friend of all. On being approached, He forsakes 
not even him who has incurred sin by wishing ill to the whole world. Bear this in mind, 
Ravana: the same Lord whose Name destroys the threefold agony has manifested 
Himself (in human form). (1 — 4) 
 “Again and again I fall at your feet and pray you, Ravana: abandoning pride, 
infatuation and arrogance, adore the Lord of Kosala. The sage Pulastya (our grand- 
father) had sent this message to us through a disciple of his. Availing myself of this 
golden opportunity, dear brother, I have immediately conveyed it to you.” (39 A-B) 




803 
Ravana had a very old and sagacious minister named Malyavan. He felt much 
gratified to hear Vibhisana’s words. “Your younger brother, dear son, is the very 
ornament of wisdom. Therefore, take to heart what Vibhisana says.” “Both these fools 
glorify the enemy! Is there no one here who will remove them out of my sight ?” 
Malyavan thereupon returned to his residence, while Vibhisana began again with joined 
palms: “rightful intellect and the perverted one dwell in the heart of all: so declare the 
Puranas and Vedas, my lord. Where there is right type of intellect, prosperity of every kind 
reigns; and where there is unwisdom misfortune is the inevitable end. Perversity has 
obviously taken possession of your heart; that is why you account your friends as foes 
and your enemies as friends. And that is why you are so very fond of Slta, who is the 
very night of destruction* for the demon race.” (1 — 4) 
 “Clasping your feet I beseech you: grant this prayer of mine as a token of affection 
for me. Restore Sita to Rama so that no harm may come to you.” (40) 
* Kalaratri literally means the night preceding universal destruction at the end of a Kalpa or the span 
of life of the universe. 

804 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Vibhisana spoke wisdom and that too in words that had the approval of the wise, as 
well as of the Puranas and Vedas. Ravana, however, rose in a fury as soon as he heard 
them. “O wretch, your death is imminent now. O fool, you have always lived on my generosity; 
yet, O dullard, you have favoured the enemy’s cause. Tell me, wretch, if there is any one 
in this world whom I have failed to conquer by the might of my arm. Dwelling in my capital 
you cherish love for the hermits ! If so, go and join hands with them, O fool, and teach 
wisdom to them.” So saying, he kicked his younger brother, who in his turn clasped his 
brother’s feet again and again. Uma, here lies the greatness of a saint, who returns good 
evan for evil. “It dose not after you have beaten me, since you are like a father to me. But 
your welfare, my lord, lies in adoring Sri Rama.” Taking his ministers with him Vibhisana 
departed through the air exclaiming so as to make himself heard by all: — (1 — 5) 
“Sri Rama is true to His resolve and all-powerful; while your councillors are all 
doomed. I, therefore, now betake myself to the Hero of Raghu’s line for protection; blame 
me no more.” (41) 

Chapter 157
No sooner had Vibhisana left with these words than the doom of them all was 
sealed. Disrespect to a saint, Parvati, immediately robs one of all blessings. The moment 
Ravana abandoned Vibhlsana the wretch lost all his glory. Indulging in many expectations 
Vibhlsana, however, gladly proceeded to the Lord of the Raghus. “On reaching there I 
will behold those lotus-feet with ruddy soles, so soft and so delightful to the devotees. 
Nay, I will behold those feet whose very touch redeemed the Rsi’s wife (Ahalya), that 
hallowed the Dandaka forest, that Janaka’s Daughter has locked up in Her bosom, that 
chased the delusive deer and that dwell as a pair of lotuses in the lake of Siva’s heart. 

I am really blessed that I am going to see those very feet. (1 — 4) 
 “I will go today and presently behold with these eyes of mine those very feet in 
whose wooden sandals Bharata’s mind remains absorbed !” (42) 


Cherishing such fond expectations Vibhisana instantly crossed over to the other 
side of the ocean (where Sri Rama had encamped with His host). When the monkeys 
saw Vibhisana coming, they took him for some special messenger of the enemy. 
Detaining him outside they approached Sugriva (the lord of the monkeys) and told him 
all the news. Said Sugriva, “Listen, O Lord of the Raghus: Ravana’s brother (Vibhisana) 
has come to see You.” The Lord, however, asked, “What do you think of the matter, my 
friend?” The lord of the monkeys replied, “Listen, O Ruler of men: the wiles of these 
demons are beyond one’s comprehension. One does not know wherefore he has come, 
capable as he is of taking any form he likes. Obviously the fool has come to spy out our 
secrets; what appeals to me, therefore, is that he should be taken prisoner and detained.” 
“Friend, you have thought out a wise course: but My vow is to dispel all fears from the 
mind of those who seek refuge in Me.” Hanuman rejoiced to hear these words of the 
Lord, who cherished paternal affection for His protege. (1 — 5) 
“Those people who forsake a suppliant, apprehending evil from him are vile and 
sinful; their very sight is abominable.” (43) 
“I will not abandon even the murderer of myriads of Brahmanas, if he seeks refuge 
in Me. The moment a creature turns its face towards Me the sins incurred by it through 
millions of lives are washed away. A sinner by his very nature is averse to My worship. 
Had Vibhisana been wicked at heart, could he ever dare to approach Me? That man 
alone who has a pure mind can attain to Me; I have an aversion for duplicity, wiles and 
censoriousness. Even if Ravana has sent him to find out our secrets, we have nothing 
807 
to fear or lose, O lord of the monkeys. Laksmana, O my friend, can dispose of in a trice 
all the demons the world contains. And if he has sought shelter with Me out of fear, I will 
cherish him as My own life. (1 — 4) 

 “In either case bring him here,” the All-merciful laughed and said. “Glory to the 
merciful Lord,” cried the monkeys and proceeded with Arigada and Hanuman (to usher 
in Vibhisana). (44) 
The monkeys respectfully placed Vibhisana ahead of them and proceeded to the 
place where the all-merciful Lord of the Raghus was. Vibhisana beheld from a distance 
the two brothers who ravished the eyes of all. Again as he beheld Sri Rama, the home 
of beauty, he stopped winking and stood stockstill with his gaze intently fixed on the 
Lord. He had exceptionally long arms, eyes resembling the red lotus and swarthy limbs 
that rid the suppliant of all fear. His lion-like shoulders and broad chest exercised great 
charm, while His countenance bewitched the mind of countless Cupids. The sight 
brought tears to his eyes and a deep thrill ran through his body. He, however, composed 
his mind and spoke in gentle accents: “My lord, I am Ravana’s brother. Having been born 
in the demon race. O Protector of gods, my body has the element of Tamas (inertia and 
ignorance) preponderating in it and I have a natural affinity for sins even as an owl is fond 
of darkness. (1 — 4) 

 “Having heard with my own ears of Your fair renown I have come to You with the 
belief that my lord (You) dissipates the fear of rebirth. Save me, save me, O Hero of 
Raghu’s line, reliever of distress, delighter of those who take refuge in you.” (45) 
When the Lord saw Vibhisana falling prostrate with these words, He immediately 
started up much delighted. The Lord rejoiced at heart to hear his humble speech and, 
taking him in His long arms, clasped him to His bosom. Meeting him with His younger 
brother (Laksmana) He seated him by His side and spoke words that dispelled the fear 
of His devotee: “Tell me, king of Lanka, if all is well with you and your family, placed as 
you are in vicious surroundings. You live day and night in the midst of evil-minded 
persons; I wonder how you are able to maintain your piety, my friend, I know all your 
ways: you are a past master in correct behaviour and are averse to wrong-doing. It is 
much better to live in hell, dear Vibhisana; but may Providence never place us in the 
company of the wicked.” “All is well with me now that I have beheld Your feet, O Lord 
of the Raghus, and since You have shown Your mercy to me, recognizing me as Your 
servant. (1 — 4) 
 “There can be no happiness for a creature nor can its mind know any peace even 
in a dream so long as it does not relinquish desire, which is an abode of sorrow, and 
adore Sri Rama (Yourself).” (46) 

809 

 “That villainous crew — greed, infatuation, jealousy, arrogance and pride — haunts 
the mind only so long as the Lord of the Raghus does not take up His abode there, armed 
with a bow and arrow and with a quiver fastened at His waist. Attachment to the world is 
like a dark night fully advanced, which is so delightful to the owls of attraction and aversion; 
it abides in the heart of a creature only so long as the sun of the Lord’s glory does not 
shine there. Having seen Your lotus feet, O Rama, I am now quite well and my grave 
fears have been set at rest. The threefold torments of mundane existence cease to have 
any effect on him who enjoys Your favour, my gracious lord. I am a demon vilest of nature 
and have never done any good act. Yet the Lord whose beauty even sages fail to perceive 
with their mind’s eye, has been pleased to clasp me to His bosom. (1 — 4) 
 “Ah, I am blessed beyond measure, O all-gracious and all-blissful Rama, in that 
I have beheld with my own eyes the lotus feet which are worthy of adoration even to 
Brahma and Siva.” (47) 
810 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“Listen, My friend: I tell you My nature, which is known to Bhusundi, Sambhu (Lord 
Siva) and Girija (Parvati) too. If a man, even though he has been an enemy of the whole 
animate and inanimate creation, comes terror-stricken to Me, seeking My protection and 
discarding vanity, infatuation, hypocrisy and trickeries of various kinds, I speedily make 
him the very like of a saint. The ties of affection that bind a man to his mother, father, 
brother, son, wife, body, wealth, house, friends and relations are like so many threads 
which a pious soul gathers up and twists into a string wherewith he binds his soul to My 
feet. Nay, he looks upon all with the same eye and has no craving and his mind is free 
from joy, grief and fear. A saint of this description abides in My heart even as mammon 
resides in the heart of a covetous man. Only saints of your type are dear to Me; for the 
sake of none else do I body Myself forth.” (1 — 4) 

 “Those men who worship My personal form, are intent on doing good to others, 
firmly tread the path of righteousness, and are steadfast in their vow and devoted to the 
feet of the Brahmanas are dear to Me as life.” (48) 
811 
 “Listen, O king of Larika; you possess all the above virtues; hence you are 
extremely dear to Me.” On hearing the words of Sri Rama all the assembled monkeys 
exclaimed, “Glory to the All-merciful !” Vibhisana’s eagerness to hear the Lord’s speech, 
which was all nectar to his ears, knew no satiety. He clasped His lotus feet again and 
again, his heart bursting with boundless joy. “Listen, my lord, Ruler of the whole 
creation — animate as well as inanimate, Protector of the suppliant and Knower of all 
hearts: I did have some lurking desire in my heart before; but the same has been washed 
away by the stream of devotion to the Lord’s feet. Now, my gracious Lord, grant me such 
pure devotion (to Your feet) as that which gladdens Siva’s heart.” “So be it”, replied the 
Lord, staunch in fight, and immediately asked for the water of the sea. “Even though, My 
friend, you have no craving, My sight in this world never fails to bring its reward.” So 
saying, Sri Rama applied on his forehead the sacred mark of sovereignty and a copious 
shower of flowers rained down from the heavens. (1 — 5) 	
Thus did the Lord of the Raghus save Vibhisana from being consumed by the fire 
of Ravana’s wrath, fanned to fury by his own (Vibhisana’s) breath, and bestowed on him 
unbroken sovereignty. Nay, He conferred on Vibhisana with much diffidence the same 
fortune which Lord Siva had bestowed on Ravana after the latter had offered his ten 
heads to Him in a sacrifice. (49 A-B) 


Chapter 158
Those men who worship anyone else, giving up such a (benign) lord, are mere 
beasts without a tail and a pair of horns. Recognizing Vibhisana as His own man the Lord 
accepted him in His service; the amiability of His disposition gladdened the heart of the 
whole monkey host. Then the All-wise, who dwells in the heart of all, is manifest in all 
forms, though bereft of all and unconcerned, and who had appeared in human semblance 
with a specific motive and as the exterminator of the demon race, spoke words strictly 
observing the rules of decorum: “Listen, O lord of the monkeys and O valiant sovereign 
of Lanka, how are we to cross the deep ocean full of alligators, snakes and all varieties 
of fishes, most unfathomable and difficult to cross in everyway?” “Listen, O Lord of the 
Raghus,” replied the king of Lanka, “Although Your arrow itself can dry up innumerable 
oceans, yet propriety demands that You should approach the ocean and request the 
deity presiding over it (to allow You a passage). (1 — 4) 
 “My lord, the deity presiding over the ocean is an ancestor of Yours; hence he 
will think over the question and suggest some means (of crossing the ocean).* The 
whole host of bears and monkeys will thus be able to cross the ocean without much 
ado.” (50) 
* It is stated in the Ramayana of Valmlki and other scriptures that the bed of the ocean was dug by King 
Sagara, hence it is known by the name of ‘Sagara.’ King Sagara was an ancestor of Sri Rama and thus the 
deity presiding over the ocean is also spoken of by Vibhisana as a forefather of the Lord. 

 “Friend, you have suggested an excellent plan; let us try it and see if Providence 
helps it.” This counsel, however, did not find favour with Laksmana, who was greatly 
pained to hear Sri Rama’s words. “No reliance can be placed on the freaks of fortune. 
Fill your mind with indignation and dry up the ocean. Fate is a crutch for the mind of 
cowards alone; it is the indolent who proclaim their faith in fate.” Hearing this the Hero 
of Raghu’s line laughed and said, “We shall do accordingly; pray, have patience.” 
Reassuring His younger brother (Laksmana) with these words the Lord of the Raghus 
went to the seashore. First of all He bowed His head and greeted the ocean and then, 
spreading some Kusa grass on the shore, took His seat thereon. As soon as Vibhisana 
proceeded towards the Lord, Ravana sent spies after him. (1 — 4) 
Assuming the false appearance of monkeys they witnessed all the doings of Sri 
Rama and praised in their heart the Lord’s virtues and His fondness for those who come 
to Him for protection. (51) 

They openly commenced applauding Sri Rama’s amiability and in the intensity of 
their emotion forgot their disguise. The monkeys now recognized them as the enemy’s 
spies; they bound them all and brought them in the presence of Sugriva (the lord of the 
monkeys). Said Sugriva, “Listen, all you monkeys: mutilate the demons and dismiss 
them.” Hearing Sugriva’s command the monkeys ran and paraded them in bonds all 
through the camp. The monkeys, then started belabouring them right and left; the 
demons piteously cried for help, yet the monkeys would not let them alone. “Whosoever 
robs us of our nose and ears, we adjure him by Sri Rama not to do so.” When Laksmana 
heard this, he called them all near him; and moved to pity he laughed and immediately 
had them released. “Give this note into Ravana’s hands and tell him: read, destroyer of 
your race, what Laksmana says.” (1 — 4) 

“Further convey to the fool by word of mouth my generous message: surrender 
Sita and make peace or your death is approaching.” (52) 

Chapter 159

Bowing their head at Laksmana’s feet the spies immediately departed, recounting 
the virtues of Sri Rama. With Sri Rama’s praises on their lips they entered Lanka and 
bowed their head at Ravana’s feet. The ten-headed monster laughed and asked them the 
news: “Report me, Suka, your own welfare and then tell me the news about Vibhisana 
whom death has approached very near. The fool left Lanka where he was ruling; the wretch 
will now be crushed as a weevil with barley-grains. Tell me next all about the host of bears 
and monkeys, that has been driven over here by a cruel destiny. It is the poor soft-hearted 
sea that has stood as a protector of their lives. Lastly tell me the news about the ascetics 
(Rama and Laksmana) whose heart is obsessed with unceasing terror of me. (1 — 4) 

815  
“Did you meet them or did they beat their retreat on hearing my fair renown? Why 
should you not speak of the enemy’s prowess and strength; your wits seem utterly 
dazed.” (53) 

 “My lord, just as you have so kindly put these questions to me, so do you believe 
what I say and be not angry. No sooner had your younger brother (Vibhisana) met Sri 
Rama than the latter applied the sacred mark of sovereignty on his forehead. When the 
monkeys heard that we were Ravana’s (Your majesty’s) spies, they bound us and 
persecuted us in many ways. They were about to cut off our ears and nose; but when 
we adjured them by Rama not to do so, they let us go. You have enquired, my lord, about 
Sri Rama’s army; but a thousand million tongues would fail to describe it. It is a host of 
bears and monkeys of diverse hue and gruesome visage, huge and terrible. He who 
burnt your capital and killed your son (Aksa) is the weakest of all the monkeys. The army 
includes innumerable champions with as many names, fierce and unyielding monsters of 
vast bulk and possessing the strength of numberless elephants.” (1 — 4) 

816 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“Dvivida, Mayanda, Nila, Nala, Arigada, Gada, Vikatasya, Dadhimukha, Kesari, 
Nisatha, Satha and the powerful Jambavan are some of them.” (54) 
 “Each of these monkeys is as mighty as Sugriva (the king) and there are tens of 
millions like them; who can dare count them? By the grace of Sri Rama they are 
unequalled in strength and reckon the three spheres of creation as of no more account 
than a blade of grass. I have heard it said, Ravana, that the commanders of the various 
monkey-troops alone number eighteen thousand billions. In the whole host, my lord, there 
is not a single monkey who would not conquer you in battle. They are all wringing their 
hands in excess of passion; but the Lord of the Raghus does not order them (to march).” 
‘We shall suck the ocean dry with all its fish and serpents or fill it up with huge 
mountains. Nay, we shall crush the ten-headed Ravana and reduce him to dust.’ Such 
were the words that all the monkeys uttered. Fearless by nature, they roared and bullied 
as if they would devour Lanka. (1 — 4) 
 “All the monkeys and bears are born warriors and, besides, they have Lord Sri 
Rama over their head. Ravana, they can conquer in battle even millions of Yamas 
(death personified).” (55) 
817 
 “A hundred thousand Sesas would fail to describe the greatness of Sri Rama’s 
valour, strength and intelligence. With a single shaft He could dry up a hundred seas; 
yet, being a master of propriety, He consulted your brother (Vibhisana) and in accordance 
with his suggestion He is asking passage of the ocean with a heart full of compassion.” 
The ten-headed monster laughed to hear these words. “It was because of such wits 
that he (Rama) took monkeys for his allies. That is why, confirming the advice of my 
brother, who is a born coward, he is persistent in demanding of the ocean (like a 
pet child) something which is impossible. Fool, why do you bestow false praise on 
the enemy, whose might and wisdom I have fathomed. Triumph and glory in this world 
are inaccessible to him who has a cowardly counsellor like Vibhisana.” The spy waxed 
angry to hear the words of the wicked monarch and taking it to be an opportune moment 
he took out the letter (from Laksmana). “Sri Rama’s younger brother (Laksmana) gave 
me this note; have it read, my lord, and soothe your heart.” Ravana laughed when 
he took the letter in his left hand; and summoning his minister, the fool asked him 
to read it out. (1 — 5) 
818 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Beguiling your mind with flattering words, O fool, do not bring your race to utter ruin. 
By courting enmity with Sri Rama you will not be spared even though you seek the 
protection of Visnu, Brahma or Siva. Therefore, abandoning pride, like your younger 
brother, either seek the lotus feet of the Lord as a bee or be consumed with your family 
like a moth into the fire of Sri Rama’s shafts, O wretch. (56 A-B) 
Ravana was dismayed at heart as he listened to the above message but wore a 
feigned smile on his face and spoke aloud for all to hear: “The younger hermit’s grand 
eloquence is just like attempt of a man lying on the ground to clutch with hands the vault 
of heaven.” Said Suka, “My lord, giving up haughtiness take every word of it as true. 
Abandon anger and give ear to my advice: my lord, avoid a clash with Sri Rama. The 
Hero of Raghu’s line is exceedingly gentle of disposition, even though He is the lord of 
the entire universe. The Lord will shower His grace on you the moment you meet Him, 
and will not take to heart even a single offence of yours. Pray, restore Janaka’s Daughter 
to Sri Rama; at least concede this request of mine.” When Suka asked him to surrender 
Videha’s Daughter, the wretch kicked him. Suka, however, bowed his head at Ravana’s 
feet and proceeded to the place where the all-merciful Lord of the Raghus was. Making 
obeisance to the Lord he told Him all about himself and by Rama’s grace recovered his 
original state. He was an enlightened sage; it was by Agastya’s curse, Parvati, that he 
had been transformed into a demon. Adoring Sri Rama’s feet again and again the sage 
returned to his hermitage. (1 — 6) 

Chapter 160
Three days had elapsed, the crass ocean would not answer the Lord’s prayer. Sri 
Rama thereupon indignantly said, “There can be no love without inspiring fear.” (57) 

 “Laksmana, bring Me My bow and arrows; I may as well dry up the ocean with 
a missile presided over by the god of fire. Supplication before an idiot, friendship 
with a rogue, inculcating liberality on a born miser, talking wisdom to one steeped 
in worldliness, glorifying dispassion before a man of excessive greed, a lecture on 
mindcontrol to an irascible man and a discourse on the exploits of Sri Hari to a libidinous 
person are as futile as sowing seeds in a barren land.” So saying, the Lord of the 
Raghus strung His bow and this stand (of the Lord) delighted Laksmana’s heart. 
When the Lord fitted the terrible arrow to His bow, a blazing fire broke out in the 
heart of the ocean; the alligators, serpents and fishes felt distressed. When the 
god presiding over the ocean found the creatures burning, he gave up his pride and, 
assuming the form of a Brahmana, came with a gold plate filled with all kinds of 
jewels. (1 — 4) 
Though one may take infinite pains in watering a plantain it will not bear fruit unless 
it is hewed. Similarly, mark me, O king of birds, (continues Kakabhusundi,) a vile fellow 
heeds no prayer but yields only when reprimanded. (58) 
The god presiding over the ocean clasped the Lord’s feet in dismay. “Forgive, my 
lord, all my faults. Ether, air, fire, water and earth — all these, my lord, are inert by nature. It 
is Maya (Cosmic Nature) which brought them forth for the purpose of creation under an 
inspiration from You; so declare all the scriptures. One would attain happiness in life only by 
remaining where he has been placed by the Lord. My Lord has done well in giving me a 
lesson; but You have fixed certain innate treat for everyone. A drum, a rustic, a Sudra, a 
beast and a woman — all these deserve instructions. By the Lord’s glory I shall be dried up 
and the army will cross over; but this will bring no credit to me. Your command, however is 
inviolable; thus declare the Vedas, I shall do at once what pleases You.” (1 — 4) 
On hearing his most submissive words the all-merciful smiled and said, “Tell me, 
dear father, some device whereby the monkey host may cross over.” (59) 
821 
“My lord, the two monkey brothers, Nila, and Nala, got a boon in their childhood 
from a sage. Touched by them even huge mountains will float on the ocean by Your 
glory. Cherishing my lord’s (Your) greatness I too shall help You to the best of my ability. 
In this way, my lord, have the ocean bridged, so that this glorious achievement of Yours 
may be sung in all three spheres of creation. With this arrow, my Lord, exterminate a 
race of vile criminals inhabiting my northern coast.” On hearing this, Sri Rama, who was 
as tender-hearted as He was staunch in battle, immediately relieved the agony of 
Ocean’s heart. The god presiding over the ocean was rejoiced and gratified to witness 
Sri Rama’s astounding might and valour. He related to the Lord all the doings (of those 
villains); and bowing to His feet, Ocean took his leave. (1 — 4) 
The god presiding over the ocean left for his home; the idea (of bridging the ocean) 
commended itself to the blessed Lord of the Raghus. This story (of Sri Rama’s exploits in 
this Kanda), which wipes out the impurities of the Kali age, has been sung by Tulasidasa 
according to his own (poor) lights. The excellences of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) 
are an abode of delight, a panacea for all doubt and an unfailing remedy for sorrow. Therefore, 
giving up all other hope and faith, ever sing and hear them, O foolish mind. 

Chapter 161

A recital of the virtues of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) bestows all blessings. 
Those who reverently hear them cross the ocean of mundane existence without any 
bark. (60) 

Thus ends the fifth descent into the Manasa lake of SrT Rama’s exploits, that 
eradicates all the impurities of the Kali age. 

