


Sri Ramacaritamanasa 

(The Manasa lake containing the exploits of Sri Rama) 

Descent Six 

(Lanka-Kanda) 
Chapter 162
I adore Sri Rama, the supreme Deity, the object of worship even of Siva 
(the Destroyer of Cupid), the Dispeller of the fear of rebirth, the lion to quell the mad 
elephant in the form of Death, the Master of Yogis, attainable through immediate 
knowledge, the storehouse of good qualities, unconquerable, attributeless, immutable, 
beyond the realm of Maya, the Lord of celestials, intent on killing the evil-doers, the only 
protector of the Brahmanas, beautiful as a cloud laden with moisture, who has lotus-like 
eyes and appeared in the form of an earthly king. (1) 

824 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

I glorify Sankara, the Lord of Kasi (the modern Varanasi), the Consort of Girija 
(Himalaya’s Daughter), the storehouse of good qualities, the Destroyer of Cupid, worthy 
of all praise, shining like a conchshell or the moon, most handsome of persons, clad in 
a tiger’s skin, decked with dreadful ornaments in the shape of deadly serpents, fond of 
the Gariga and the moon, the allayer of the sins of the Kali age and the celestial tree 
yielding the fruit of Blessedness as wishes. (2) 
May Lord Sambhu, the bestower of blessings, who confers on the virtuous even 
final beatitude, which is so difficult to obtain, and who punishes the evil-doers, extend His 
blessings to me. (3) 

Chapter 163
O my soul, why do you not worship Sri Rama, who has the indivisible Time for 
His bow and the various divisions of time such as a Paramanu,* a twinkling, a moment, 
a year, an age and a cycle for His fierce arrows? 
On hearing Ocean’s words Sri Rama called His counsellors and spoke to them 
thus : “Why delay now? Build the bridge, so that the army may cross over.” “Listen, O 
Glory of the solar race.” said Jambavan with joined palms, “Your name itself, my lord, 
is a bridge by ascending which men cross over the ocean of mundane existence.” 
The measure of time taken by a sunbeam in passing by an atom of matter. 

*LANKA-KANDA* 825 
“It will take no time to cross this insignificant sea!” Hearing this, the son of the wind- 
god added : “My lord’s glory is a great submarine fire that had long since drise up the 
water of the ocean. But it was filled again by the flood of tears shed by Your enemies’ 
wives; that is how it came to be brackish in taste.” When the monkeys present there heard 
this hyperbolic remark made by the son of the wind-god, they gazed on the person of Sri 
Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) and smiled. Jambavan called the two brothers, Nala and 
Nila, and related to them the whole story. “Calling to mind the glory of Sri Rama start 
building the bridge and you will experience no difficulty.” He then called the monkey troops 
and said, “Hear, all of you, a small request of mine. Enshrine in your heart the lotus-feet 
of Sri Rama and engage yourself in a sport, bears and monkeys all. Go forth, you 
formidable monkey troops and bring numerous trees and mountains.” On hearing this 
command the monkeys and bear set forth hurrahing and exclaiming, “Glory to the almighty 
Hero of Raghu’s race!” (1 — 5) 
They would lift up gigantic trees and mountains in mere sport and bring them to 
Nala and Nila, who in their turn carefully set to build the bridge. (1) 

826 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

The monkeys brought huge mountains, which were received like playballs by Nala 
and Nila. When the All-merciful saw the exceedingly beautiful construction of the bridge, 
He smiled and observed thus: “This is a most delightful and excellent spot; its glory is 
immeasurable and cannot be described in words. I will install (an emblem of) Lord 
Sambhu here: it is the crowning ambition of My heart.” Hearing this the lord of the 
monkeys despatched a number of messengers, who invited and fetched all the great 
sages. Having installed an emblem of Lord Siva and worshipped It with due solemnity, 
He said, “No one else is so dear to Me as Siva. An enemy of Siva although he calls 
himself a devotee of Mine, cannot attain to Me even in a dream. He who is opposed to 
Sankara and yet aspires for devotion to Me, is doomed to perdition, stupid and dull-witted 
as he is.” (1 — 4) 
 “Men, who, though devoted to Sankara, are hostile to Me and even so those who 
are enemies of Siva but votaries of Mine shall have their abode in the most frightful hell 
till the end of creation.” (2) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 827 
 “They who will behold Lord Ramesvara will, on quitting the body, go direct to My 
sphere in heaven. And a man who takes the water of the Gariga and pours it on the Lord 
will attain liberation in the form of absorption into My being. Again, whosoever adores the 
Lord in a disinterested spirit and without guile, will be blessed by Sankara with devotion 
to Me. And he who sees the bridge erected by me will be able to cross the ocean of 
worldly existence without any exertion.” Sri Rama’s words gladdened the heart of all and 
the great sages returned each to his own hermitage. Girija, (says Sankara,) such is the 
way of the Lord of the Raghus: He ever loves those who take refuge in Him. The clever 
Nala and Nila constructed the bridge and by Rama’s grace their renown spread far and 
wide. Those very rocks that not only sink themselves but cause even other things to 
sink alongwith them floated like so many rafts. This is, however, not ascribed to any 
miraculous power of the ocean, nor to a virtue of the rocks themselves, nor again to any 
skill of the monkeys. (1 — 5) 
It was by the glory of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) that rocks floated on the 
ocean. They are dull-witted indeed, who go to worship a lord other than Sri Rama. (3) 

828 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 164
Having completed the bridge they made it exceptionally strove; the All-merciful was 
glad at heart to see it. As the army marched it was a sight beyond all telling, the troops 
of monkey warriors roaring as they went. Ascending an eminence near the bridge the 
gracious Lord of the Raghus surveyed the vast expanse of the ocean. All the creatures 
inhabiting the ocean appeared on the surface in order to have a look at the Lord, who 
was the very fountain-head of mercy. There were many kinds of alligators, crocodiles, fishes 
and serpents with bodies eight hundred miles in length and colossal in size. There were 
others who could devour even these. They in their turn were afraid of some other creatures. 
All gazed upon the Lord and would not stir even when diverted. They were all glad of 
heart and felt very happy. Covered by them the water could not be seen; they were filled 
with ecstasy at the sight of Sri Hari’s beauty. The army advanced on receiving the Lord’s 
command : who can describe the vastness of the monkey host? (1 — 5) 
The bridge being overcrowded, some of the monkeys flew through the air; while 
others crossed over treading on the backs of sea monsters. (4) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 829 
The gracious Lord of the Raghus and His brother laughed at the sight of this 
amusing spectacle and marched. The Hero of Raghu’s line reached the other shore 
alongwith the host: the throng of monkey chiefs was beyond all description. The 
Lord encamped Himself across the ocean and commanded all the monkeys to go 
and regale themselves on the delightful fruit and roots. As soon as they heard this the 
bears and monkeys ran off in all directions. All the trees bore fruit in the interest of 
Sri Rama in season or out of season without any regard to the laws of time. The 
bears and monkeys would eat the luscious fruit, shake the trees and hurl hill-tops 
towards Lanka. If they ever found a straggling demon anywhere, they all hemmed him 
in and teased him not a little; nay, they would bite off his nose and ears and let him 
go only after reciting to him the Lord’s fair renown. Those who had thus lost their 
nose and ears went and related everything to Ravana. The moment he heard that 
the sea had been bridged the ten-headed monster exclaimed in consternation with all 
his tongues at once : — (1 — 5) 
 “What! has he really bridged the waves, the billows, the sea, the ocean, the main, 
the deep, the brine, the tide, the hyaline, the lord of rivers?” (5) 
830 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 165
Then, realizing his own nervousness, he laughed and left for his palace forgetting 
his fear. When Mandodari (Ravana’s consort) heard that the Lord had arrived and 
bridged the ocean in mere sport, she took her spouse by the hand, led him to her own 
palace and spoke to him in most sweet accents. Bowing her head at his feet, she spread 
the end of her garment as a token of supplication and said, “Listen to my words without 
getting angry, my beloved: one should enter into hostilities with him alone whom one may 
be able to conquer by wit or physical force. The disparity between you and the Lord of 
the Raghus, however, is certainly analogous to that obtaining between a fire-fly and the 
sun. He who disposed of the most powerful Madhu and Kaitabha and finished the most 
valiant sons of Diti (Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa), nay, who bound Bali and despatched 
King Sahasrabahu (so-called because he was possessed of a thousand arms) — it is He 
who has descended on earth in order to relieve it of its burden. My lord, you should not 
oppose Him who is the Master of Time, fate and the soul.” (1 — 5) 
 “Bowing your head at Sri Rama’s lotus feet restore Janaka’s Daughter to Him; 
then, handing over the kingdom to your son and, retiring to the forest, worship the Lord 
of the Raghus.” (6) 




* LANKA-KANDA* 831 

“Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), my lord, is compassionate to the humble (He 
will surely forgive you). Even a tiger (the most ferocious of all beasts) will not devour a 
man if he goes submissively before him. You have already accomplished all that you had 
to do: you have conquered not only gods and demons but the whole animate and 
inanimate creation. Holy men, my lord, have declared this maxim that a monarch should 
retire to the forest in the fourth stage of his life. There, my spouse, you should adore Him 
who is the creator, preserver and destroyer (of the universe). Renouncing all worldly ties, 
my lord, worship the selfsame Hero of Raghu’s line, who is fond of the suppliant. The 
same Lord of the Raghus, the King of Kosala, whom the greatest of sages strive hard 
to realize and for whom monarchs relinquish their throne and shed every attachment — 
it is He who has arrived here to shower His grace on you. If, my beloved, you accept 
my advice, your fair and exceedingly holy renown shall spread through all the three 
spheres.” (1 — 4) 
So saying she clasped him by the feet; and with eyes full of tears and trembling 
in every limb she added, “My lord, worship Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) so that 
my union with you may last till eternity.” (7) 
Thereupon Ravana lifted Maya’s daughter (Mandodari) and the wretch began to 
harp on his own glory. “Listen, darling; you are haunted by idle fears. What warrior 


832 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


in this world is my equal? I have conquered by the might of my arms not only Varuna 
(the god presiding over the waters), Kubera (the god of riches), the wind-god, Yama 
(the god of punishment), and all the other regents of the quarters but Death himself. 
Gods, demons and human beings are all under my control; what is the cause of your 
fear, then?” He thus reassured her in many ways and once more went and sat in his 
council-chamber. Mandodari was now convinced at heart that it was her husband’s 
impending death which had turned his head. Returning to his council-hall he asked 
his ministers: “How shall we proceed to fight the enemy?” “Listen, O lord of the 
demons,” replied the ministers, “why do you ask this question again and again? What 
is there to be afraid of, which should engage our thought? Human beings, monkeys 
and bears are our food.” (1 — 5) 
Hearing the words of all, Prahasta (Ravana’s son) said with joined palms, 
“Transgress not the bounds of propriety, my lord; your counsellors possess very little 
wit.” (8) 

Chapter 166
“All your stupid ministers tell you only that which is pleasing to their master; but 
that way you cannot succeed; my lord. A stray monkey sprang across the ocean and 




* LANKA-KANDA* 833 

came this side and all the people still extol his doings in their heart of hearts. What ! Did 
none of you have any appetite then? Why did you not seize and devour him while he was 
burning your city? Your ministers have given you, my lord, an advice which, though 
pleasant to hear, will hand you in trouble afterwards. He who has had the sea bridged 
in mere sport and has crossed over to the Suvela hill with all his army, tell me, is He 
an ordinary mortal whom you say you will devour? All these people are simply bragging. 
Dear father, listen to my words with great attention and do not account me a coward. 
There are multitudes of men in this world who are given to hearing and uttering pleasant 
words. Those men, however, who hear and utter words which are most salutary yet 
jarring to the ear are few and far between, my lord. Listen to my sound advice : first send 

an envoy to Sri Rama; and afterwards, when you have restored Janaka’s Daughter, make friends with Him.” (1 — 5) 

“If He withdraws on receiving back His Consort, you should have no more 
quarrel with Him. Otherwise meet Him face to face on the battle-field, and give him a 
tough fight.” (9) 
“If, my lord, you accept this advice of mine, your fair renown will spread throughout 
the world in either case.” The ten-headed monster asked his son (Prahasta) in a fury, 
“Fool, who has taught you such wisdom? If you entertain doubt in your mind from even 




834 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


now, my son, you have proved yourself to be a prickly plant at the root of a bamboo 
(which brings about the destruction of the bamboo).” On hearing the harsh and 
most malignant remarks of his father Prahasta left for home uttering these bitter words: 
“Words of good counsel fall flat on you even as a medicine proves ineffectual for a man 
who is doomed to die.” Finding that it was evening now the ten-headed monster turned 
towards his palace fondly gazing on his twenty arms. On the highest level of Lanka stood 
a most wonderful hall, where music and dancing contests used to be held. Ravana went 
and took his seat in that hall, while Kinnaras (celestial songsters) began to sing his 
praises. Expert celestial nymphs commenced their dance to the accompaniment of 
cymbals, tabors and lutes. (1 — 5) 
He constantly revelled in luxuries one hundred times as much as Indra could 
enjoy. He had a most powerful foe threatening at his door; yet he had no anxiety or 
fear. (10) 
At this end the Hero of Raghu’s line encamped with his vast army on Mount 
Suvela. Observing a very lofty, supremely lovely, even and remarkably shining peak, 
Laksmana carefully spread on it with his own hands beautiful young leaves and 
blossoms of trees, which he covered with a charming and soft deerskin; it was on this 
seat that the gracious Lord rested Himself. The Lord placed His head in the lap of 
SugrTva (the lord of the monkeys) with the bow and quiver to His left and right. He was 
passing both His lotus hands on an arrow, while the would-be king of Lanka (Vibhisana) 
whispered some secret in His ears. The blessed Arigada and Hanuman kneaded His 

* LANKA-KANDA* 835 
lotus-feet in diverse ways; while behind the Lord sat Laksmana in the pose of a warrior, 
with the quiver fastened at his waist and the bow and arrow ready in his hands. (1 — 4) 
Thus rested Sri Rama, the embodiment of benignity, beauty and goodness. 
Blessed are those men who remain ever immersed in the thought of the Lord as depicted 
here. Looking towards the east the Lord saw the moon risen above the horizon and said 
to them all, “Just look at the moon and see how undaunted like the king of beasts (lion) 
he appears.” (1 1 A-B) 

Chapter 167
 “Dwelling in the eastern quarter, which may be compared to a mountain-cave, this 
lion of a moon, an embodiment of supreme grandeur, glory and strength, struts through 
the forest of the sky having rent asunder the crown of a mad elephant in the form of the 
836

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
darkness. The stars appear like so many pearls strewn all over the sky, which serve to 
adorn the lovely dame of night.” “Now tell me, brethren,” continued the Lord, “What you 
think, each of you, of the dark spot in the moon.” Said Sugriva, “Listen, O Lord of the 
Raghus: it is only the shadow of the earth that is seen in the moon.” “The demon Rahu 
struck the moon,” said another; “and the spot is nothing but a scar left on the latter’s 
bosom.” A third suggested: “When Brahma (the Creator) fashioned the face of Rati 
(consort of the god of love), he took out the essence of the moon (thus leaving a hole 
in the orb thereof). The hole is still visible in the heart of the moon and through it can be 
seen the shade of the blue.” The Lord said, “Poison is the moon’s most beloved brother; 
that is why he has lodged it in his heart and, diffusing his envenomed rays, torments 
parted lovers.” (1 — 5) 
Said Hanuman, “Listen, my lord: the moon is Your own beloved servant and it is 
Your image enshrined in his heart that appears as a dark patch.” (12 A) 
The all-wise Sri Rama smiled to hear the words of Hanuman (the son of the 
wind-god). Then, looking towards the south, the All-merciful Lord spoke thus: — (12 B) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 837 
 “Vibhisana, see how clouds are gathering fast and the lightning flashes in the 
southern quarter. A lowering cloud is gently rumbling and I fear lest a severe hail-storm 
may ensue.” Vibhisana replied, “Listen, my gracious lord: there is neither lightning nor a 
gathered mass of cloud. On the top of Larika there stands a hall where Ravana is 
witnessing a music and dancing contest. It is the large royal umbrella spread over his 
head which presents the appearance of a thick dark mass of cloud; the ornaments in 
Queen Mandodari’s ears, my lord, flash like lightning; while the incomparable music of 
cymbals and tabors is the sweet rumbling that You hear, O King of celestials.” The Lord 
smiled to perceive Ravana’s arrogance; He strung His bow and fitted an arrow to the string. (1 — 4) 
With a single shaft the Lord then struck Ravana’s umbrella and crowns as well as 
MandodarT’s ear-drops, which fell to the ground before the very eyes of all; but none 
could know the mystery. Having performed this startling feat 6ri Rama’s shaft came 
back and dropped into His quiver again. And everybody in Ravana’s assembly was 
alarmed to see this great interruption in his revelry. (13 A-B) 
838 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

There was no earthquake nor any strong gust of wind. Nor did they see any 
weapon or missile. All however, pondered within themselves that it was a most alarming 
ill-omen. When the ten-headed monster saw that the assembly had taken fright, he 
laughed and made the following ingenious remarks: “How can the mere dropping down 
of crowns be an ill-omen to him in whose case even the falling of heads proved a lasting 
boon? Therefore, return each to your own home and retire.” Accordingly all bowed their 
head and returned home. But anxiety lodged in MandodarT’s hearts ever since her ear- 
rings dropped to the ground. With eyes full of tears and joining both her palms she said, 
“O lord of my life, listen to my prayer. My beloved, cease hostility with Sri Rama and 
have no more of obstinacy in your heart taking Him to be a mere mortal.” (1 — 4) 
 “Believe my word that Sri Rama (the Jewel of Raghu’s race) Himself is manifested 
in the form of this universe and that the Vedas conceive of every limb of His as a distinct 
sphere.” (14)
 
Chapter 168
“The subterranean regions (Patala) are His feet and the abode of Brahma His 
head; while the other (intermediate) spheres are located in His other limbs. Terrible Death 
is the mere contraction of His eyebrows, the sun is His eye and the mass of clouds His 
locks. The twin-born gods Asvinikumaras (the celestial physicians) are His nostrils and 
the alternating days and nights constitute the repeated twinkling of His eyelids; while the 
* LANKA-KANDA* 839

ten quarters of the heavens are His ears: so declare the Vedas. The winds are His breath 
and the Vedas, His own speech; greed is His lower lip and Yama (the god who sits in 
judgment on the dead), His dreadful teeth; Maya (cosmic illusion) is His laughter and the 
regents* of the ten quarters, His arms; fire is His mouth and Varuna (the god presiding 
over the waters), His tongue; while the creation, preservation and destruction of the 
universe are His gestures. The eighteen principal species of the vegetable kingdom 
constitute the line of hair on His belly, the mountains are His bones and the rivers 
represent the network of His veins. The ocean is His belly and the inferno, His organs 
of urination and excretion. In short, the universe is a manifestation of the Lord and it is 
no use going into further details. (1 — 4) 
“Lord Siva is His ego, Brahma His reason, the moon His mind and the great 
Visnu is His faculty of understanding. It is the same Lord Sri Rama, manifested in the 
form of this animate and inanimate creation, who has assumed a human semblance. 
Pondering thus, hear me, O lord of my life: cease hostility with the Lord and cultivate 
devotion to the feet of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) so that my good-luckf may 
not desert me.” (15 A-B) 
The ten quarters alongwith their regents are named below: — 
Name of the quarter 
East 
South-East 
South 
South-West 
West 

North-West 
North 
North-East 
The Upper Region 
The Lower Region 

Regent 
Indra (the lord of paradise) 
Agni (the god of fire) 
Yama (the god who recompenses our deeds after death) 
Nirrti (the lord of the Raksasas of a benevolent type) 
Varuna (the god presiding over the waters) 
Vayu (the wind-god) 
Kubera (the god of riches) 
Isana (Lord Siva) 
Brahma (the Creator) 
Ananta (the serpent-god) 
f Good-luck in the eyes of a Hindu lady consists in the longevity of her husband and widowhood is 
considered as the greatest curse. 





840 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 169
Ravana laughed when he heard the words of his wife. “Oh, how mighty is the power 
of infatuation! They rightly observe in regard to the character of a woman that the 
following eight demerits ever abide in her heart: recklessness, mendacity, fickleness, 
deceit, timidity, indiscretion, impurity and callousness. You have described the enemy’s 
cosmic form and thus told me a most alarming story. But all that (whatever is comprised 
in that cosmic form), my beloved, is naturally under my control; it is by your grace that 
this has become clear to me now. I have come to know your ingenuity, my dear; for in 
this way you have told my greatness. Your words, O fawn-eyed lady, are profound: they 
afford delight when understood and dispel all fear even when heard.” Mandodari was now 
convinced at heart that her husband’s impending death had deluded him. (1 — 4) 
While Ravana was laughing and joking in diverse ways as mentioned above, the 
day broke and the king of Lanka, who was intrepid by nature and further blinded by pride, 
entered the court. The reed neither blossoms nor bears fruit even though the clouds rain 
nectar on it. Similarly the light of wisdom would never dawn on a fool even though he may 
have a teacher like Viranci (Brahma). (16 A-B) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 841 
At this end the Lord of the Raghus woke at daybreak and, summoning all His 
counsellors, asked their opinion: “Tell me quickly what course should be adopted.” 
Jambavan bowed his head at the Lord’s feet and said, “Listen, O omniscient Lord, 
indweller of all hearts, storehouse of wisdom, strength, glory, piety and goodness: I offer 
advice to You according to my own lights. It is that Vali’s son (Prince Arigada) may be 
sent as an envoy (to Ravana).” The good counsel commended itself to all and the All- 
merciful turned to Arigada and said, “O son of Vali, repository of wisdom, strength and 
goodness! go to Lanka, dear one, for My cause. I need not give you any elaborate 
instructions. I know you are supremely clever. You should talk with the enemy in such 
words as may advance My cause and serve his interest at the same time.” (1 — 4) 
Bowing to the Lord’s command and adoring His feet, Arigada arose and said, 
“He alone is an ocean of virtues, on whom You shower Your grace, O divine Rama.” 
“All the objects of my Lord are self-accomplished,” he thought; “He has only honoured 
me (by charging me with this task).” And the thought thrilled his body and delighted 
his heart. (17 A-B) 

842 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Adoring the Lord’s feet and keeping His glory in his heart Arigada bowed his head 
to all and departed. The gallant son of Vali, who was an adept in warfare, was dauntless 
by nature, cherishing as he did the might of the Lord. As soon as he entered the city he 
met one of Ravana’s sons (Prahasta by name), who was playing there. From words they 
proceeded to fight; for both were unrivalled in strength and in the prime of youth to boot. 
He raised his foot to kick Arigada, who in his turn seized the foot and, swinging him 
round, dashed him to the ground. Finding him a formidable warrior, the demons ran helter- 
skelter in large numbers, too much frightened to raise an alarm. They did not tell one 
another what had happened, but kept quiet when they thought of the death of Ravana’s 
son. There was a cry in the whole city that the same monkey who had burnt down Lanka 
had come again. “Who knows what turn Providence is going to take?” everyone thought 
in excessive dismay. People showed him the way unasked: if he but looked at anyone, 
the latter would turn deadly pale. (1 — 5) 
With his thoughts fixed on the lotus-feet of Sri Rama he then reached the gate of 
Ravana’s council-chamber. And there the stout-hearted and mighty hero stood with the 
mien of a lion glancing this side and that. (18) 


* LANKA-KANDA* 843 
He forthwith sent a demon and apprised Ravana of his arrival. On hearing the 
news the ten-headed monster laughed and said. “Go, usher him in my presence and let 
me see where the monkey has come from.” Receiving his order a host of messengers 
ran and fetched the monkey chief. Arigada saw the ten-headed giant seated on his 
throne like a living mountain of collyrium. His arms looked like trees and heads like 
peaks; while the hair on his body presented the appearance of numerous creepers. His 
mouths, nostrils, eyes and ears were as big as mountain caves and chasms. With an 
unflinching mind he entered the court, the valiant son of Vali, possessed of great might. 
The assembly abruptly rose at the sight of the monkey; at this Ravana’s heart was filled 
with great fury. (1 — 4) 
Thinking of Sri Rama’s might Arigada bowed his head and took his seat in the 
assembly as fearlessly as a lion treads in the midst of mad elephants. (19) 

844 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 170
 “Monkey, who are you?” Ravana asked. “I am an ambassador from the Hero of 
Raghu’s line, Ravana. There was friendship between you and my father; hence it is in 
your interest, brother, that I have come. Of noble descent and a grandson of the sage 
Pulastya (one of the mind-born sons of Brahma), you worshipped Lord Siva and Brahma 
in various ways, obtained boons from them, accomplished all your objects and conquered 
the guardians of the different spheres as well as all earthly sovereigns. Under the 
influence of kingly pride or infatuation you carried off Slta, the Mother of the Universe. 
But even now you listen to my friendly advice and the Lord will forgive all your offences. 
Put a straw between the rows of your teeth and an axe by your throat and take all your 
people including your wives with you, respectfully placing Janaka’s Daughter at the 
head. In this way repair to Him shedding all fear. (1 — 4) 
 “And address Him thus: ‘O Protector of the suppliant, O Jewel of Raghu’s race, 
save me, save me now.’ The moment He hears your piteous cry the Lord will surely rid you of every fear.” 
LANKA-KANDA* 

845 
“Mind what you speak, you little monkey. Fool, are you not aware of my being 
an avowed enemy of the gods? Tell me, young fellow, your own name as well as your 
father’s. What is the common ground on which you claim fellowship between your 
father and myself?” “Ahgada is my name: I am Vali’s son. Did you ever meet him?” 
Ravana felt uncomfortable when he heard Ahgada’s reply. “Yes, I do remember that 
there was a monkey, Vali by name. But, Ahgada, are you Vali’s son? You have been 
born as a fire which stands for a cluster of bamboos for the destruction of your own race. 
Why should you have not perished even in the womb? In vain were you born, who have 
called yourself with your own mouth a hermit’s envoy. Now tell me if all is well with Vali 
and, if so, where is he?” Ahgada laughed at this and then replied. “Ten days hence you 
shall go to Vali and embracing your friend personally enquire after his welfare. He will 
tell you all about the welfare that follows from hostility with Sri Rama. Listen, O fool: 
the seeds of dissension can be sown in the mind of him alone whose heart is closed 
to the Hero of Raghu’s line.” (1 — 5) 
 “I, forsooth, am the exterminator of my race; while you, Ravana, are the preserver 
of yours. Even the blind and the deaf would not say so, whereas you possess a score of eyes and an equal number of ears.” 
 “What! Did I bring dishonour on my family by acting as His ambassador whose 

846 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
feet even Siva, Brahma and all the gods and sages desire to adose? It is strange that 
your heart does not burst asunder even on entertaining such an idea.” When he heard 
the monkey’s sharp rejoinder, Ravana glowered at him and said, “Wretch, I put up with 
your harsh words only because I know the bounds of decorum and righteousness.” Said 
the monkey, “I too have heard of your piety, which is evident from the fact that you stole 
away another’s wife. And I have witnessed with my own eyes the protection you 
vouchsafed to an envoy. An upholder of piety, why do you not drown yourself and thus 
end your life? When you saw your sister with her ears and nose cut off, it was from 
considerations of piety that you forgave the wrong. Your piety is famed throughout the 
world: I too am very fortunate in having been able to see you.” (1 — 4) 

 “Prate no more, you stupid creature, but look at my arms, O foolish monkey, that are 
like so many Rahus to eclipse the tremendous moon-like might of the guardians of the 
spheres. Again, (you might have heard that) while resting on my lotus-like palms in the lake 
of the heavens. Mount Kailasa with Sambhu (Lord Siva) shone like a swan.” (22 A-B) 

LANKA-KANDA* 
847 
“Listen, Arigada; tell me which warrior in your army will dare encounter me. Your 
master (Rama) has grown weak due to separation from his wife, while his younger brother 
(Laksmana) shares his grief and is consequently very sad. You and Sugriva are like trees 
on a river bank (that can be washed away any moment); as for my younger brother (Vibhisana), 
he is a great coward. Your counsellor, Jambavan, is too advanced in age to take his stand 
on the field of battle; while Nala and Nila are mere architects (and no warriors). There 
is one monkey, no doubt, of extraordinary might — he who came before and set fire to the 
city.” On hearing this Vali’s son (Arigada) replied: “Tell me the truth, O demon king: is 
it a fact that a monkey burnt down your capital? A puny monkey set on fire Ravana’s 
capital ! Who, on hearing such a report, would say it as true? Ravana, he whom you have 
extolled as a distinguished warrior is only one of Sugriva’s petty runners. He who walks 
long distances is no champion; we sent him only to get news.” (1 — 5) 
848 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

“It seems true that the monkey set fire to your capital without receiving an order 
from his master. That is why he did not go back to Sugriva and remained in hiding for 
fear. All that you say, Ravana, is true and I am not in the least angry at hearing it. There 
is none in our army who would fight you with any amount of grace. Make friends or enter 
into hostilities only with your equals: this is a sound maxim to follow. If a lion were to kill 
frogs, will anyone speak well of him? Though it would be derogatory on the part of Sri 
Rama to kill you and He will incur great blame thereby, yet, mark me, Ravana, the fury 
of the Ksatriya race is hard to face.” The monkey (Ahgada) burnt the enemy’s heart with 
shafts of speech shot forth from the bow of sarcasm; and the ten-headed hero 
proceeded to extract the arrows, so to speak, with pairs of pincers in the form of 
rejoinders. He laughed and said: “A monkey possesses one great virtue: it does everything in its power to serve him who 

* LANKA-KANDA* 849 
 “Bravo for a monkey, who dances unabashed in the service of its master 
anywhere and everywhere. Dancing and skipping about to amuse the people it serves the 
interest of its master; this shows its keen devotion to duty. Arigada, all of your race are 
devoted to their lord; how could you, then, fail to extol the virtues of your master in the 
way you have done? I am a respecter of merit and too magnanimous to pay any attention 
to your scurrilously glib talk.” Said Arigada: “The son of the wind-god gave me a true 
account of your partiality to merit. He laid waste your garden, killed your son and set fire 
to your city and yet (in your eyes) he did you no wrong. Remembering such amiability 
of your disposition I have been so insolent in my behaviour with you, O Ravana. On 
coming here I have witnessed all that Hanuman told me, viz., that you have no shame, 
no anger and no feeling of resentment.” “It is because you possess such a mentality that 
you have proved to be the death of your own father.” Uttering these words Ravana burst 
into laughter. “Having been the death of my father I would have next claimed you as my 
victim; but a thought has come to me just now. Knowing you to be a living memorial of 
Vali’s unsullied fame, I desist from killing you, O vile boaster. Tell me, Ravana, how many 
Ravanas there are in the world? Or hear from me how many I have heard of. One went 
to the nether world (Patala) to conquer Bali and was tied up in the stables by the children, 
who made sport of him and thrashed him till Bali took pity on him and had him released. 
Another again was discovered by King Sahasrabahu, who ran and captured him as a 
strange creature and brought him home for the sake of fun. The sage Pulastya then went 
and secured his release.” (1 — 8) 
“Yet another, I am much ashamed to tell you, was held tight under Vali’s arm. Be 
not angry, Ravana, but tell me the truth, which of these may you be?” (24) 

850 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Listen, O fool: I am the same mighty Ravana, the sport of whose arms is familiar 
to Mount Kailasa (the peak sacred to Lord Siva) and whose valour is known to Lima’s 
Spouse (Siva Himself), in whose worship I offered my heads as flowers. Times without 
number have I removed my lotus-like heads with my own hands to worship Lord Siva 
(the Slayer of Tripura). The prowess of my arms is well-known to the guardians of the 
eight quarters, whose heart, you fool, still smarts under injuries inflicted by them. The 
toughness of my chest is familiar to the elephants supporting the eight quarters, whose 
fierce tusks, whenever I impetuously grappled with them, failed to make any impression 
on it and snapped off like radishes the moment they struck against it. Even as I walk, 
the earth shakes like a small boat when a mad elephant steps into it. I am the same 
Ravana, known for his might all over the world; did you never hear of him, you lying 
prattler ?” (1 — 4) 
 “You belittle that Ravana and extol a mortal man? Barbarous monkey, O puny 
wretch. I have now fathomed your wisdom.” (25) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 851 
On hearing this, Arigada indignantly replied: “Take care what you say, you 
vainglorious wretch. How can He be accounted a man, you wretched Ravana, at whose 
very sight melted away the pride of Parasurama — the same Parasurama whose axe was 
like a fire to consume King Sahasrabahu’s boundless forest of arms, or (to use another 
simile) like the sea in whose swift tide have drowned innumerable kings time after time. 
How can Sri Rama be a mortal, you arrogant fool? Is the god of love a mere archer, the 
Gariga a mere stream, the cow of plenty a mere beast, the tree of Paradise a mere tree, 
the gift of food an ordinary gift, nectar an ordinary drink, Garuda (the mount of God 
Visnu) a mere bird, the thousand-headed Sesa a mere serpent and the wish-yielding gem 
a mere stone, O ten-headed monster? Listen, O dullard: is Vaikuntha an ordinary sphere 
and unflinching devotion to the Lord of the Raghus an ordinary gain?” (1 — 4) 
 “What! is Hanuman, O fool, an ordinary monkey, who got off unhurt after trampling 
your pride as well as that of your army, laying waste your garden, setting your capital 
on fire and slaying your own son?” (26) 
“Listen, Ravana: giving up all hypocrisy, why do you not adore the All-merciful 
Lord of the Raghus? Oh wretch, if you pit yourself against Rama, even Brahma (the 
Creator) and Rudra (Lord Siva) cannot save you. Fool, brag not in vain; if you contend 




852 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


with Rama, such will be your fate: struck with Sri Rama’s arrows your many heads will 
fall to the ground in front of the monkeys, and the bears and monkeys will play with those 
heads as with so many balls. When the Lord of the Raghus gets enraged in battle and 
His many fierce arrows dart, will you then be able to bounce like this? Realizing this, 
adore the high-souled Sri Rama.” On hearing these words Ravana flared up like a 
blazing fire on which clarified butter has been thrown. (1 — 4) 

 “I have a brother like Kumbhakarna (lit., one having ears as big as a pair of jars) 
and the renowned Meghanada (the vanquisher of Indra) for my son. And have you never 
heard of my own valour, by which I have conquered the entire creation, both animate and 
inanimate?” (27) 

 “Fool, with the help of monkeys your master has bridged the ocean; is this what 
you call valour? There are many birds which fly across the ocean; yet listen, O monkey, 
they are no heroes all. Now each of my arms is a veritable ocean, brimming over with 
a flood of strength, beneath which many a valiant god and man has been drowned. What 
hero is there, who will cross these twenty unfathomable and boundless oceans? I made 
the guardians of the eight quarters do menial service to me; while you, O wretch, glorify 
an earthly prince before me! If your lord, whose virtues you recount again and again, is 
valiant in battle, why does he send an ambassador to me? Is he not ashamed to make 
terms with his enemy? Look at my arms, which lifted and violently shook Mount Kailasa, 
and then, foolish monkey, extol your master, if you like.” (1 — 4) 

LANKA-KANDA* 


853 
 “What hero is there equal to Ravana, who with his own hands cut off his heads 
time and again and offered them to the sacrificial fire with great delight, as will be borne 
out by Gauri’s Spouse (Lord Siva) Himself.” (28) 

 “When as my skulls began to burn I saw the decree of Providence traced on my 
brow and read that I was going to die at the hands of a mortal, I laughed; for I knew 
Brahma’s prophecy to be false. I am not afraid in my heart even when I remember this; 
for (I am sure) Brahma must have traced the decree in his senile dementia. Yet, you fool, 
you repeatedly exalt the might of another hero in my presence, giving up all shame and 
sense of prestige.” Arigada replied: “Yes, there is no one in the whole world so 
shamefaced as you. You are bashful by your innate disposition, since you never indulge 
in self-praise. Only the story of offering your heads (to Lord Siva) and lifting the mountain 
(Kailasa) has been foremost in your mind and hence you have told it twenty times over. 
As for (the tale of) that strength of arm by which you were able to conquer Sahasrabahu, 
Bali and Vali, you have kept it secret in your heart. Listen, fool, and brag no more. Can 
anyone turn a hero by cutting off one’s head ? A juggler is never called a hero even 
though he hacks to pieces his whole body with his own hands.” (1 — 5) 

854 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Ponder, O fool, and see for yourself that due to infatuation moths burn themselves 
in fire and donkeys carry loads; but they are never termed as heroes.” (29) 
 “Cease wrangling any more, O wretch; listen to my advice and have done away 
with pride. I have not come to you as an envoy (to seek terms with you), O ten-headed 
monster; the Hero of Raghu’s line has sent me from other considerations. The All- 
merciful has said again and again: ‘A lion earns no reputation by killing a jackal.’ Bearing 
in mind the words of my lord I have suffered, O fool, your pungent speech. Otherwise, 
I would have smashed your jaws and taken back Sita by force. I have judged your 
strength, O vile enemy of heaven, from the very fact that you carried off another’s wife 
while she was all by herself. You are the lord of demons and exceedingly haughty, while 
I am a messenger of one of Sri Rama’s servants. If I were not afraid of insulting Sri 
Rama, I would have wrought this wonder before your very eyes (1 — 4) 
“Dashing you to the ground, exterminating your army and laying waste your town, 
O fool, I would have taken away Janaka’s Daughter with all your wives.” (30) 





* LANKA-KANDA* 855 

“Even if I did so, it would hardly bring me any credit; for it is no act of valour to 
slay the slain. A follower of the Vamamarga (a sect of Sakti-worshippers indulging in 
certain prohibited practices as a part of their worship), a man given over to lust, a miser, 
a grossly stupid fellow, an utterly destitute person, a man suffering from disrepute, an 
extremely old man, an ever sick person, one who is always angry, he who is hostile to 
Lord Visnu, an enemy of the Vedas and saints, he who exclusively nourishes his own 
body, he who is given to slandering others, and he who is a storehouse of sins — these 
fourteen types of persons are no better than corpses, even while they live. Realizing this, 
O wretch, I refrain from killing you. But rouse my anger no more.” On hearing this, the 
demon king bit his lips, wrung his hands and burst out furiously: “O vile monkey, you are 
now bent upon dying; for though small, you have spoken big words. He, on whose 
strength you dare utter such wild and sharp words, O stupid monkey, has no strength, 
glory, intelligence or majesty at all.” (1 — 4) 
 “Finding him devoid of merit and self-esteem, his father sent him into exile. Apart 
from that sorrow the separation from his wife is telling on him and above all he is 

856 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
constantly obsessed with terror of me. The demons devour day and night many such 
men as he of whose might you are proud; realize this, O fool, and cease to be 
perverse.” (31 A-B) 

When he thus inveighed against Sri Rama, the monkey chief grew furious with 
rage. For he who opens his ears to vituperation against Hari (Bhagavan Visnu) or Hara 
(Lord Siva) incurs as great a sin as he who kills a cow. Arigada (the great monkey) gave 
a loud yell and furiously struck both his mighty arms against the ground. The earth shook 
and members of the assembly were thrown off their seats and took to flight, possessed 
as they were by the hobgoblin of fear. The ten-headed monster (Ravana) too was about 
to topple down but recovered himself and stood up. Yet his most beautiful crowns fell to 
the ground; some of them he took and set on his heads, while Arigada sent the rest flying 
to the Lord. The monkeys fled when they saw the crowns coming. “Good heavens, how 
is it that meteors have begun to fall even during the daytime ? Or is it that Ravana in his 
fury has hurled four thunderbolts, which are coming with great speed ?” The Lord smiled 
and said, “Be not afraid at heart. They are neither meteors nor thunderbolts, nor even the 
planets Rahu and Ketu. They are the crowns of the ten-headed Ravana, despatched by 
Vali’s son (Arigada), that are coming this side.” (1 — 5) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 857 
The son of the wind-god sprang forward and caught them in his own hands; he 
then took them to the Lord and placed them before Him. The bears and monkeys gazed 
on them with wonder; for they were dazzling like the sun. At the other end the ten-headed 
monster (Ravana) in his fury indignantly cried to all about him, “Seize the monkey, and 
seizing him forthwith slay him.” Arigada smiled to hear this. (32 A-B) 
 “After killing him sally forth at once, all you mighty warriors, and devour every 
bear and monkey wherever you find one. Go and clear the earth of monkeys and 
capture the two ascetic brothers (Rama and Laksmana) alive.” The monkey prince 
(Arigada) got enraged and exclaimed again: “Are you not ashamed to wag your tongue 
like this? Cut your throat and die, you shameless destroyer of your race. Your heart 
does not crack even on witnessing my strength! O vicious stealer of women, storehouse 
of impurities, O sense-bound, dull-witted wretch, you babble abuse in a state of delirium, 
which shows that death has overtaken you, O wretched demon. You will reap its 
consequences later on when the monkeys and bears belabour you. Even as you utter 
the words that Sri Rama is a mortal, it is strange that your tongues, O proud demon, 
do not drop off. It is, however, certain that your tongues will drop off alongwith your 
heads on the battlefield.” (1 — 5) 

858 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


 “How can He be a mortal, O ten-headed monster, who killed Vali with a single 
shaft? You are blind with all your twenty eyes; fie upon your birth, O dullard of ignoble 
womb. Sri Rama’s arrow are all thirsting for your blood and I spare you only for fear of 
displeasing Him, O vile demon of biting tongue.” (33 A-B) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 859 

“I am capable of smashing your jaws; but I have no permision from the Lord of the 
Raghus to do so. Otherwise I feel so enraged that I would break all your ten heads and 
lifting up Lanka drop it into the ocean. Your Lanka is like a fruit of the Udumbara tree; 
while you are like so many unsuspecting insects that reside in it. A monkey as I am, I 
would lose no time in eating it; but the gracious Rama has not given me the order.” 
Ravana smiled to hear this witty remark. “Fool, where did you learn to tell such big lies? 
Vali never boasted like this; it seems association with the hermits has made you such a 
vaunting liar.” “I am a blustering liar indeed, O monster with twenty arms, if I do not tear 
out your ten tongues.” Recalling Sri Rama’s might Ahgada grew indignant and firmly 
planted his foot in the midst of the whole assembly. “If you can but stir my foot, O fool 
Sri Rama will return forthwith and I shall forgo Sita as a lost wager.” “Listen, champions 
all:” exclaimed the ten-headed monster, “seize the monkey by the leg and dash him to 
the ground.” Meghanada (the vanquisher of Indra) and many other stout warriors rose with 
delight from their respective seats and rushed with all their might, employing numerous 
devices; but Ahgada’s foot refused to stir. The warriors, therefore, resumed their seats 
with their heads bent low. The enemies of heaven rose again and dashed forward; but 
the monkey’s foot moved no more than a sensually-minded striver, O Garuda (the enemy 
of serpents), is able to uproot the tree of error implanted in his heart (continues 
Kakabhusundi). (1 — 7) 
Myriads of great warriors of Meghanada’s might arose with joy and swooped 
down; but the monkey’s foot did not budge, and they hung their heads and sat down 
again. The monkey’s foot would no more leave the ground than the soul of a saint would 
give up moral uprightness even though confronted with numberless obstacles. The 
enemy’s pride left him when he witnessed this. (34 A-B) 

860 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Everyone who saw the monkey’s strength was discomfited at heart. Challenged by 
the monkey Ravana himself now rose. Even as Ravana proceeded to grasp his foot, Vali’s 
son (Arigada) broke out, “You cannot be saved by clinging to my feet. Fool, why do you 
not go and clasp Sri Rama’s feet ?” He turned back much abashed at heart to hear this. 
All his splendour was gone and he was robbed of his glory even as the moon fades away 
at midday. With drooping heads he resumed his seat on the throne as if despoiled of all 
his riches. Sri Rama is the soul of the universe and the lord of life : how can he who is hostile to Him find any rest ? The universe, Uma (Parvati), springs into existence and is 

again dissolved with a mere play of Sri Rama’s eyebrows. When He is capable of 
transforming a blade of grass into a thunderbolt and a thunderbolt into a blade of grass, 
how, then, can a vow of His ambassador prove false ? Angada admonished him in various 
ways; but as his end had drawn near, he would not listen. Having squashed the enemy’s 
pride, the son of King Vali glorified his lord to his very face and departed, saying : “If I 
do not slay you after I have sported with you on the battlefield for some time, it will be 
no use my indulging in self-praise just now.” Angada had killed Ravana’s son even before 
he arrived in the latter’s presence and Ravana felt very sad at the news. The demons 
too grew extrimely nervous with fear when they witnessed the effectiveness of Ahgada’s 
challenge. (1 — 7) 


* LANKA-KANDA* 861 


Setting at naught Ravana’s power, the mighty monkey, Vali’s son, his body thrilling 
over with emotion and eyes full of tears, clasped in delight Sri Rama’s lotus feet. 
Perceiving that it was evening, the ten-headed monster returned disconsolately to his 
palace, where Mandodari again spoke and advised him: — (35 A-B) 

“Ponder in your mind, my beloved lord, and abandon perversity; your fight with 
the Lord of the Raghus is quite out of order. Sri Rama’s younger brother (Laksmana) 
had traced a thin line;* that too you could not cross. Such is your valour! My beloved, 

* It is mentioned in other works that, while leaving STta all alone to join Sri Rama, who had been out 
chasing the gold deer, Laksmana traced with an end of his bow a line round, Her cottage at PancavatT with a 
curse that any demon whatsoever who dared to cross the line would be instantly reduced to ashes. Availing 
himself of the opportunity Ravana made his appearance there in the guise of a mendicant and begged alms 




862 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


do you expect to conquer Him in battle, whose messenger performed such feats? Leaping 
across the ocean in mere sport, that lion among monkeys fearlessly entered your Lanka, 
killed your guards and laid waste your garden. Nay, he killed Prince Aksa under your 
very nose, and, setting fire to the whole capital, reduced it to ashes. Where did your 
pride of power remain lurking at that time? Indulge no more in idle boasts, my spouse, 
and lay my words a little to heart. Do not imagine that the Lord of the Raghus is a 
mere earthly king, my husband; but know him to be the Ruler of the animate and 
inanimate creation, unequalled in strength. The might of His arrows is known to Marica; 
but you did not heed his words, taking him to be a mean fellow. In Janaka’s court 
were assembled numberless kings; you too were present there with your incomparable 
and enormous strength. There Sri Rama broke Siva’s bow and won the hand of Janaka’s 
Daughter; why did you not conquer Him in battle then? The son of Indra (the lord of 
celestials) tasted of His strength when He caught hold of him and spared his life after 
destroying one of his eyes. You also witnessed Surpanakha’s condition, yet you did 
not feel much abashed in your heart.” (1 — 7) 

Chapter 171
“He who had the ocean bridged as a mere pastime and has encamped with His 
of Sita; and the latter offered to give him alms while keeping within the line. Ravana, however, refused to 
accept the alms from within a barrier and carried off STta as soon as She overstepped the boundary. 

* LANKA-KANDA* 863 

host on Mount Suvela, the same merciful Lord, the glory of the solar race, sent to you 
in your own interest an ambassador who, like a lion in the midst of a herd of elephants 
trampled on your might in open court. Nay, He has for His servants most formidable 
warriors like Ahgada and Hanuman, who are so dauntless in battle; and still, my beloved 
lord, you speak of Him again and again as a mortal ! In vain do you carry on your head 
the burden of pride, attachment and arrogance. Ah, my lord, you have turned hostile to 
Sri Rama and, overtaken as you are by death, the light of wisdom does not dawn on your 
mind. Death does not smite anyone with uplifted rod; he simply robs the victim of his 
piety, strength, reason and judgment. He alone whom death has approached very near 
falls a prey to delusion like you.” (1 — 4) 
 “Two of your sons have been slain and your capital has been burnt down; mend 
error even now, my beloved. Adore the All-merciful Lord of the Raghus, my husband, and 
win unsullied fame thereby.” (37) 
Hearing the words of his consort (Mandodari), which were piercing like a shaft, 
he rose and left for his council-chamber when the day broke. Forgetting all his fears he 
went and occupied his throne bloated with excess of pride. At this end Sri Rama 

864 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


summoned Arigada, who came and bowed his head at the Lord’s lotus feet. The gracious 
Rama (the slayer of Khara) most politely seated him by His side and smilingly said, “O 
son of Vali, I have great curiosity in my mind; therefore, I ask you a question. Tell me 
the truth, dear child. Ravana is the head of the demon race; he is celebrated throughout 
the world for his incomparable might. It is rather strange that you tossed no less than four 
of his crowns to me; tell me, my son, by what device you were able to lay your hands 
on them?” “Listen, O omniscient lord, the delighter of the suppliant : they were no crowns 
but the four virtues (resources) of a king, viz., Sama (conciliation), Dana (gift), Danda 
(physical force or coercion) and Bheda (division), which abide in the heart of a king — 
so declare the Vedas, my lord. They are the beautiful pedestals of statesmanship: 
remembering this, they themselves came to my lord (who is a true repository of all 
statesmanlike virtues).” (1 — 5) 

Chapter 172
 “Listen, O Lord of Kosala : Ravana (the ten-headed monster) is lacking in piety, 
bears a settled aversion to my lord’s feet and has fallen into the clutches of death. Hence 
the aforementioned virtues have forsaken him and sought refuge in You.” The noble- 
minded Rama smiled to hear his most ingenious reply. The son of Vali then gave Him 
a report about the fort of Lanka. (38 A-B) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 865 
When Sri Rama received the news about the enemy, He summoned all His 
counsellors by His side. “Lanka has four massive gates; Thinkar as to how we should 
assail them.” Thereupon the monkey lord (Sugriva), Jambavan (the king of bears) and 
Vibhisana (Ravana’s brother) invoked in their heart the Ornament of the solar race; and 
putting their heads together they resolved upon a definite plan. They divided the monkey 
host into four brigades and appointed efficient generals to each. They then summoned 
all the company commanders and bringing the Lord’s might home to them issued 
instructions hearing which the monkeys rushed forward roaring like lions. They gladly 
bowed their head at Sri Rama’s feet, and with mountain-peaks in their hands all the 
heroes sallied forth. Shouting, “Glory to the Hero of Raghu’s line, the Lord of Kosala” the 
bears and monkey chiefs roared and assumed a threatening attitude. Even though they 
knew that Lanka was a most impregnable fortress, the monkeys marched forward 
undaunted depending on the might of their lord. Encompassing all the four quarters like 
a mass of clouds spreading over the horizon on all sides, they imitated the sound of drums 
and kettledrums with their mouth. (1 — 5) 
 “Glory to Rama, glory to Laksmana and glory to Sugriva (the lord of the 
monkeys), thus roared the monkeys and bears, unsurpassed in their great might, like 
so many lions.” (39) 

866 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Larika became a scene of great uproar. When the highly conceited Ravana heard 
it, he with a smile said, “Look at the insolence of these monkeys!” and summoned the 
demon host. “The monkeys have crossed over here driven by fate, and my demons are 
all hungry. God has provided them with a meal even at their home.” So saying the idiot 
burst into a horselaugh. “Sally forth in every direction, champions all; and wherever you 
find the bears and monkeys seize and devour them all.” Uma, Ravana’s conceit was as 
great as that of the sandpiper, which goes to sleep with its legs in the air (and thinks that 
it will support the heavens in case they fall). Taking his orders, the demons sallied forth, 
armed with excellent slings, javelins, iron clubs and maces, fierce axes, pikes, swords, 
bludgeons and masses of rock in their hands. As foolish carnivorous birds swoop down 
upon a heap of rubies the moment they see it, and have no idea of the pain they would 
have on breaking their beaks against it, so did the man-eating monsters rush forth in their 
folly. (1—5) 
Armed with bows and arrows as well as with other weapons of various kinds, a 
vast cloud of mighty and valiant demons, staunch in battle, climbed up the battlements 
of the fort. (40) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 867 

On the gold battlements they looked like dark clouds hanging on the heights of Mount 
Meru. Martial drums and tabors sounded; the soul of the warriors was stirred by their crash. 
Numberless kettledrums and clarionets were also playing; their music cracked the heart of 
cowards. Advancing further, the demons saw the hosts of monkey and bear champions, 
exceptionally huge in size, who in their onrush would make no account of rugged valleys 
and catching hold of mountains would cleave them asunder and make passage through 
them. Gnashing their teeth and biting their lips, myriads of warriors on both sides roared 
and bullied, calling here on Rama and there on Ravana. With shouts of victory on both 
sides the fight actually commenced. The demons cast down volleys of mountain-peaks, 
which the monkeys would seize with a bound and hurl them back. (1 — 4) 
The fierce monkeys and bears would lay hold of masses of rock and hurl them 
against the fort. Darting against their adversary they would seize him by the leg and dash 
him to the ground; and in the event of his taking to flight they would challenge him to a 
duel again. The most agile and redoubtable monkeys and bears lightly sprang and 
climbed up the fort and penetrating the palaces sang 6ri Rama’s praises wherever they 
pleased. 
Catching hold of a demon each, the monkeys rushed back and jumped down 
to the ground with the demons beneath themselves on the top. (41) 

868 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Strengthened by Sri Rama’s might, the monkey host crushed the ranks of the 
demon warriors. They then climbed up the fort here and there and shouted glory to the 
Hero of Raghu’s line, who was majestic as the sun. The demon host fled before them 
like a mass of clouds driven by a strong blast. The city now burst into wails and howls; 
children, invalids and women in particular wept aloud. All joined in calling Ravana names; 
he, they said, had invited death while enjoying sovereignty. When he heard that his 
troops had beaten a retreat, the king of Lanka rallied his champions and then exclaimed 
in fury: “If I hear of anyone turning his back on the battlefield, I will behead him with 
my own terrible sword. You consumed my all and enjoyed all sorts of luxuries till now 
and lo ! life has become so dear to you on the field of battle.” The champions were 
all alarmed and put to shame to hear this stern rebuke, and marched against the enemy 
in great fury. To die in open combat is the glory of a warrior, they thought; and they 
loved their life no more. (1 — 5) 
Armed with weapons of various kinds, all the champions grappled with their 
antagonists, challenging them again and again. Striking the bears and monkeys with iron 
bludgeons and tridents, they deprived them of their nerve. (42) 

Struck with terror (continues Lord Siva) the monkeys turned tail, although Uma, 
they would come out victorious in the end. One exclaimed, “Where are Arigada and 
Hanuman? Where are the mighty Nala, Nila and Dvivida?” At the time Hanuman heard 
that his troops were breaking, that mighty warrior held his position at the western gate 
of Lanka, where Meghanada led the defence. The gate, however, would not give way and 
Hanuman was faced with a mighty impediment. The son of the wind-god grew terribly 
furious at heart and the warrior, who was formidable as death, gave a loud roar. He 
sprang and reached the fort of Lanka; and seizing a rock he rushed at Meghanada, 
shattered his chariot, overthrew the charioteer and kicked Meghanada himself at his 
chest. Another charioteer, who perceived the distress of the prince, picked him up in his 
own chariot and speedily brought him home. (1 — 4) 
When Arigada heard that the son of the wind-god had gone to the fort single- 
handed, the son of Vali, who was so valiant in battle, reached the fort in a single bound 
as a monkey would do out of sheer fun. (43) 
870 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The two monkeys let loose their fury against the enemy on the battlefield. Invoking 
in their heart the might of Sri Rama, both ran up to Ravana’s own palace and proclaimed 
the victory of Kosala’s lord. Holding the edifice in their hands they overthrew it with every 
pinnacle. The demon king was dismayed when he saw this. The women beat their breast 
with their hands crying: “This time the two pestilent monkeys have come!” Arigada and 
Hanuman frightened them with their monkey-like pranks and proclaimed to them the 
glories of Sri Ramacandra. Then, grasping each a gold pillar in their hands, the two 
champions exclaimed, “Let us now begin upon our ravaging job!” Presently they roared 
and fell on the enemy’s ranks and began to crush them with their mighty strength of 
arms, striking some with their foot and slapping another on the face and crying: “Take 
the consequences of not adoring Sri Rama!” (1 — 4) 
The two heroes crushed their adversaries one against another and pulling off the 
victim’s heads, hurled them with such precision that they dropped in front of Ravana and 
burst like so many earthen vases full of curds. (44) 
Whenever the two monkey chiefs caught hold of any great general of the demon 
host, they would seize him by the leg and send him flying to their lord (Sri Rama). 

Vibhisana would mention their name and Sri Rama assigned even them a quarter in His 
own abode. Man-eating monsters who feasted on the flesh of holy Brahmanas thus 
attained a destiny which is solicited even by Yogis (ascetics given to contemplation on 
God). Lima, (continues Lord Siva,) Sri Rama is so tender-hearted and such a storehouse 
of compassion that He bestows the highest state (final beatitude) even on the demons, 
remembering that they think of Him even though in a spirit of hostility! Tell me, Bhavani, 
who else is so benignant? Most dull-witted and utterly wretched are the men who, even 
on hearing of such a lord, worship Him not, disabusing themselves of all delusion. 
“Ahgada and Hanuman have evidently forced their way into the fort of Lanka,” thus 
observed Ayodhya’s lord. Rampaging in Lanka, the two monkeys looked like a pair of 
Mandaras churning the ocean. (1 — 4) 
Having crushed and battered the enemy’s ranks by the might of their arm and 
perceiving that it was now the close of day, the two champions jumped down without any 
exertion and came where the Lord was. (45) 

872 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


They bowed their head at the lotus-feet of their Master, and the Lord of the Raghus 
was glad at heart to see the valiant warriors. Sri Rama graciously regarded them both 
and presently their fatigue was gone and they felt supremely happy. On learning that 
Ahgada and Hanuman had left, the numerous monkey and bear warriors retired from the 
field; while the demons, recovering their strength at nightfall, sallied forth, calling on their 
ten-headed lord. At the sight of the demon host the monkeys turned again; and gnashing 
their teeth in fury the champions closed with their opponents here and there. The two 
armies stood formidable; their champion’s challenging one another every time, came to 
a grim fight without giving in. The demons were all great warriors and dark in complexion; 
while the monkeys were stupendous in size and of variaus colours. The two armies were 
equally strong and the warriors too equally matched; displaying their martial feats they 
fought with fury and looked like masses of rainy and autumnal clouds driven against one 
another by a strong wind. The generals Akampana and Atikaya (sons of Ravana), when 
they perceived their troops losing ground, employed Maya (illusive devices); in an instant 
it grew pitch dark and there was a downpour of blood, stone and ashes. (1 — 6) 

Seeing the dense darkness all round, the monkey host was thrown into disorder. 
They could not see one another and there was an outcry everywhere. (46) 
The Lord of the Raghus understood the secret of it all and summoned Ahgada and 
Hanuman. He apprised them of all that was going on and issued necessary instructions 
to them. The two monkey chiefs rushed forth in a fury as soon as they heard the 
instructions. The All-merciful then drew His bow with a smile and forthwith let fly a fiery 




* LANKA-KANDA* 873 

dart. Lo! there was light all round and no trace of darkness left anywhere, even as doubts 
disappear with the dawn of spiritual enlightenment. The bear and monkeys were relieved 
of their fatigue and rid of all fear when they saw light again, and pressed on exultingly. 
Hanuman and Arigada thundered on the field of battle and the demons fled at their 
menacing roar. But the bears and monkeys seized the demon warriors in their flight and 
dashed them to the ground, performing marvellous feats of strength even as they did so, 
or catching them by the leg, hurled them into the ocean, where alligators, serpents and 
fish snapped them up and devoured them. (1 — 4) 
Some were killed, some more were wounded, while others scampered away and 
clambered the fort. Having thus scattered the hostile forces, the bears and monkeys 
gave a loud roar. (47) 
Perceiving that it was now night, all the four divisions of the monkey host returned to 
the camp of Kosala’s lord. The monkeys were all relieved of their fatigue the moment Sri 
Rama cast His benign look on them. There (in Lanka) the ten-headed monster sent for all 
his ministers and told them about the warriors that had been killed in action. “The monkeys 
have disposed of half our forces; tell me at once what counsel should be adopted.” “There 
upon Malyavan, a very aged demon, who was Ravana’s maternal grandfather and an 
eminent counsellor, spoke words of highly ethical polity: “Listen, my son, to a few words of 
advice from me. Ever since you carried off Sita and brought Her here, there have been ill- 
omens more than one can tell. By opposing Sri Rama, whose glory has been the theme of 
the Vedas and Puranas, none has ever enjoyed happiness.” (1 — 4) 

874 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

‘The same gracious Lord who despatched Hiranyaksa with his brother Hiranyakasipu, 
as well as the mighty Madhu and Kaitabha, has descended on earth (in the person of 
Sri Rama).” (48 A) 
 “Hostility is quite out of the question with Him who is the personification of the 
Time-Spirit (the principle of destruction), a fire to consume the forest in the shape of the 
wicked, a repository of virtues and an embodiment of wisdom, and who is adored even 
by Siva, and Brahma.” (48 B) 

Chapter 173
 “Giving up all quarrel with Sri Rama, restore Videha’s Daughter to Him and 

* LANKA-KANDA* 875 

worship the All-merciful, who has a most loving disposition.” His words stung Ravana like 
shafts. “Away, wretch, with your accursed face. If it were not for your age, I would have 
finished you; now please do not appear before my eyes again.” Malyavan, however, 
thought within himself that the All-merciful has made up his mind to kill him; he, therefore, 
rose and departed abusing Ravana as he went. Meghanada thereupon exclaimed in a fury 
: “See what wonders I work the very next morning. I am going to accomplish much; why 
should I, therefore, belittle its worth by speaking of it just now?” Confidence returned to 
Ravana when he heard his son’s words; and he fondly took him into his lap. The day 
broke even while they deliberated, and the monkeys again assailed the four gates. In their 
fury they laid siege to the most powerful citadel. This gave rise to an uproarious alarm 
in the city. The demons darted forward with their weapons of every description and hurled 
down mountain-peaks from the ramparts.” (1 — 5) 
The demons hurled mountain-peaks in myriads and fired bomb-shells of every 
description, which came roaring like a crash of thunder; while the contending warriors 
roared like the clouds on the day of universal destruction. Fierce monkey warriors 
combated with their adversaries and had their bodies severely wounded and badly 
battered; yet they languished not. Seizing rocks, they hurled them against the fort; and 
the demons fell to them wherever they stood. 
When Meghanada heard that the monkeys had come and besieged the fort again, 
the hero tore down the fort and sallied forth with beat of drum to meet the enemy face 
to face. (49) 
876 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Where are the two brother princes of Kosala, those archers celebrated throughout 
the spheres? Where are Nala, Nila, Dvivida and Sugriva as well as Arigada and 
Hanuman, the most powerful of all? Where is Vibhisana the traitor to his own brother? 
I will kill them all today and him (Vibhisana) too at all events.” So saying, he fitted sharp 
arrows to his bow and in excess of fury drew the string up to his ear. Presently he 
started discharging a volley of arrows that flew like so many winged serpents. Everywhere 
monkeys were seen falling to the ground, at that time there was none who would dare 
to face him. Bears and monkeys fled in every direction; none had any desire left to 
continue the fight. Not a single monkey or bear was to be seen on the field, whom he 
had left with anything but life. (1 — 4) 

He struck his opponents with ten arrows each, and the monkey warriors dropped 
to the ground. Meghanada, who was as powerful as he was staunch in fight, now roared 
like a lion. (50) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 877 

Chapter 174
When the son of the wind-god saw his army in distress, he flew into a rage and 
rushed forth as if he were death personified. He forthwith uprated up a huge rock and 
hurled it at Meghanada with great fury. When he saw the rock coming towards him, he 
mounted up into the air; leaving his car, charioteer and horses perish. Again and again 
did Hanuman challenge him to a duel, but the demon dared not come nearer; for he knew 
the monkey’s real strength. Meghanada now approached Sri Rama and hurled every 
kind of abuse at him. He tried weapons and missiles of every description against Him; 
but the Lord with the utmost ease cut them asunder before they could reach Him. The 
fool was put out of countenance when he saw the Lord’s might, and began to practise 
all sorts of illusive devices, as if catching hold of a poor little snakeling one were to 
frighten Garuda and sport with him. (1 — 4) 
The evil-minded demon displayed his demoniac powers before Him whose 
powerful Maya (deluding potency) holds sway over all, both great and small, Siva and 
Viranci (the Creator) not excepted. (51) 
Mounting up into the air he rained down a shower of firebrands, and spouts of 
water issued forth from the earth. Fiends and fiendesses of diverse form danced with 




878 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
cries of “Maim and kill?” Now he would rain down showers of faeces, pus, blood, hair 
and bones; and now he would hurl a volley of stones. By discharging dust all round 
he made it so dark that if you held out your own hand you would not see it. The 
monkeys lost their nerve when they saw these supernatural phenomena. “At this rate 
we are all doomed” they thought. Sri Rama smiled when he saw this fun; at the same 
time He understood that the monkeys were all alarmed. With a single arrow He broke 
the illusive web, even as the sun removes the thick veil of darkness. He cast a 
gracious look on the monkeys and bears, and lo! they grew too strong to be restrained 
from fighting. (1 — 4) 
Asking leave of Sri Rama and accompanied by Arigada and other monkey chiefs, 
Laksmana marched forth in fury, bow and arrow in hand. (52) 
With bloodshot eyes, a broad chest and long arms, his white form shone like the 
snow-clad Himalaya with a slight admixture of red. At the other end the ten-headed 
monster sent out champions, who rushed forth equipped with missiles and other 
weapons of every description. With mountains, claws and trees for weapons, the 
monkeys hastened to meet the demons, shouting “Victory to Rama.” They all closed in 
the fray, match with match, both the sides equally agog to win. The monkeys, who had 
now the upper hand, battered the demons with their fists and feet and bit them with their 
teeth. They struck them down and browbeat them. “Kill, kill, seize, seize, seize, slay, 
break his head, seize his arm and tear it up!” — such were the cries that filled the air 
through all the nine divisions of the globe. Headless bodies sprinted furiously hither and 

* LANKA-KANDA* 879 


thither. Hosts of celestials witnessed the spectacle from heaven, now with joy and now 
in dismay. (1 — 4) 
Blood had collected in the hollows of the earth and dried up there and clouds of 
dust hung over it like ashes over heaps of live coal. (53) 
The wounded warriors shone like so many Kirhsuka* trees in flower. The two 
champions, Laksmana and Meghanada, grappled with each other in mounting fury. 
Neither could get the better of the other. The demon, however, resorted to wily tricks and 
unfair means. Laksmana, who was no other than Ananta (the serpent-god Sesa, whose 
wrath brings about the dissolution of the universe), then waxed furious and in a trice 
smashed the chariot and tore its driver to pieces. Sesa (Laksmana) smote him in so 
many ways that the demon (Meghanada) was all but dead. The son of Ravana thought 
within himself that he was in straits and the enemy would surely take his life. He threw 
a javelin which was notorious for killing warriors and was all brilliance; and lo! it struck 
Laksmana in the breast. The blow was so smart that the prince swooned and Meghanada 
now went near him shedding all fear. (1 — 4) 
* A Kirhsuka tree bears crimson flowers; hence the wounded parts of the warriors have been 
compared with the flowers of a Kirhsuka tree. 





880 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
A vast number of champions as powerful as Meghanada strove to lift him; but how 
could Sesa, the support of the entire globe, be thus lifted? Hence they returned smarting 
with shame. (54) 
Listen, Parvati : (continues Lord Sankara,) none can conquer him in battle, the fire 
of whose wrath soon consumes all the fourteen spheres (at the time of universal 
dissolution), and whom gods and human beings, nay, all animate and inanimate beings 
adore. He alone can understand this mystery, on whom descends Sri Rama’s grace. Now 
that it was evening, both the armies retired and the commanders of the different units 
began taking count of their troops. The All-merciful and invincible Lord of the universe, 
the all-pervading supreme Spirit, asked : “Where is Laksmana?” Meanwhile Hanuman 
brought him; seeing His younger brother (in a swoon) the Lord felt sore distressed. 
Jambavan said, “Susena, the physician, lives in Lanka; someone should be sent to fetch 
him here.” Assuming a minute (indiscernible) form Hanuman went and immediately 
brought him, house and all. (1 — 4) 
Susena came and bowed his head at Sri Rama’s lotus-feet. He mentioned the 
name of the herb as well as of the mountain where it could be had, and said, “Proceed, 
O son of the wind-god, to bring it.” (55) 




* LANKA-KANDA* 881 
Chapter 175
Enshrining Sri Rama’s lotus-feet in his heart and assuring the Lord of his own might, 
the son of the wind-god departed. At the other end a spy disclosed the secret to Ravana, 
who called at the house of Kalanemi (a demon ally of Ravana). The ten-headed monster 
told him all that he had to say, hearing which Kalanemi beat his head again and again. 
“Nobody can obstruct him who burnt your capital before your very eyes. Therefore, adore 
the Lord of the Raghus in your own interest and desist, my lord, from all vain prattle. Hold 
in your heart that lovely form, swarthy as the blue lotus, the delight of all eyes. Dismiss the 
foolish idea of T and ‘You,’ ‘mine’ and ‘thine’ and awake from slumber in the night of gross 
infatuation. Can anyone even dream of conquering Him in battle, who devours even the 
serpent of Time (which in its turn devours the entire creation)?” (1 — 4) 
The ten-headed monster flew into a tearing rage when he heard this. Thereupon 
Kalanemi reasoned to himself: “I should rather die at the hands of Sri Rama’s servant; 
for this wretch revels in his load of sins!” (56) 
882 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
So saying to himself he departed and resorted to his black art; he produced by the 
path a lake, a temple and a lovely garden. The son of the wind-god saw the good 
hermitage and thought to himself : “Let me ask leave of the hermit over there and drink 
some water, so that I may be relieved of my fatigue.” The demon (Kalanemi) had 
ensconced himself there in the deceitful garb of a hermit and sought to delude the 
messenger even of the Lord of Maya. The son of the wind-god went and bowed his head 
before him; and the demon in his turn began to recite Sri Rama’s praises. “A fierce war 
is raging between Sri Rama and Ravana, of which Rama will undoubtedly emerge 
victorious. I behold everything, my brother, even from here; for my great strength lies in 
my intuition.” On his asking for water, the demon gave Hanuman his own waterpot; but 
the monkey chief said, “My thirst will not be quenched by a small quantity of water.” 
“Then take a plunge in the lake and speedily come back. After that I will initiate you and 
you will have spiritual insight.” (1 — 4) 
No sooner had Hanuman stepped into the lake than a she-alligator seized him by 
the foot in great excitement. Having been slain by Hanuman, she assumed a celestial 
form and, mounting an aerial car, soared into the heavens. (57) 
f% Mr Rrirr to sttff ffft i 3TFsnj# fft fRt fff; ii * ii 

LANKA-KANDA* 


883 


“By your very sight, 0 dear monkey, I have been absolved of all sins and the curse 
of the great sage (which accounted for my birth in an alligator’s womb) has come to an 
end. This fellow, O monkey chief, is no hermit but a terrible demon : believe my words 
to be true.” So saying, the celestial nymph left for her abode in heaven and Hanuman 
immediately returned to the demon. Said the monkey: “First receive, holy sir, your fee as 
my spiritual preceptor and after that impart to me the sacred formula.” Hanuman then 
twisted his tail round the hermit’s head and knocked him down, and he appeared in his 
original (demoniac) form at the moment of his death and gave up the ghost while 
muttering “Rama, Rama.” Hanuman was delighted at heart to hear this name and 
proceeded on his journey. He found the mountain but failed to single out the herb 
(prescribed by Susena); he, therefore, lost no time in uprooting the mount itself. Holding 
up the mountain in his hand, Hanuman darted back through the air while it was yet night 
and happened to pass over the city of Ayodhya. (1 — 4) 
Bharata (who kept vigil at night ever since his return from Citrakuta) espied a 
colossal figure coursing through the air and thinking it to be some demon drew his bow 
to the ear and struck him with a headless shaft. (58) 
884 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 176
Struck by the dart, Hanuman dropped unconscious to the ground, crying “Rama, 
Rama, O Lord of the Raghus!” The moment Bharata heard these pleasing words he 
rushed and came posthaste by the side of the monkey. Seeing the monkey in swoon, 
the prince clasped him to his bosom and tried every means to bring him back to 
consciousness but in vain. With a sad look in his face and much distressed at heart and 
his eyes full of tears, he spoke the following words; “The selfsame Providence who 
alienated me from Sri Rama has also inflicted this terrible suffering on me. If in thought, 
word and deed I cherish sincere devotion to Sri Rama’s lotus feet, and if the Lord of the 
Raghus is kindly disposed towards me, may this monkey be relieved of all exhaustion 
and pain.” As soon as these words entered his ears the monkey chief arose and sat up, 
crying “Glory, all glory to the Lord of Kosala!” (1 — 4) 

A thrill of joy ran through Bharata’s body and tears rushed to his eyes as Bharata 
took and clasped the monkey to his bosom. His heart overflowed with love at the very 
thought of Sri Rama, the glory of Raghu’s race. (59) 
 “Tell me, dear friend, if all is well with Sri Rama, the Fountain of Joy, as well as 
with His younger brother (Laksmana) and mother Janaki (Janaka’s Daughter).” The 
monkey chief told him in brief all that had happened and Bharata felt much distressed to 
hear it and his heart was filled with remorse. “Ah me, good heavens, why should I have 
been born into this world at all, if I could not be of any service to the Lord?” But realizing 
the adverse circumstances, the gallant and mighty prince recollected himself and 
addressed Hanuman again, “You will be delayed in your journey and nothing will avail 
* LANKA-KANDA* 885 

after daybreak. Therefore, ascend my arrow, mountain and all, and I will send you straight 
into the presence of the All-merciful.” Hanuman’s pride was tickled when he heard these 
words. “How will the arrow fly with my weight?” he thought. Then, recalling Sri Rama’s 
glory, he bowed at Bharata’s feet and spoke with joined palms: — (1 — 4) 
 “Cherishing the thought of your majesty, my lord, I will go swiftly.” So saying 
and obtaining leave of Bharata, Hanuman bowed at his feet and sped on. As he 
journeyed forth, the son of the wind-god extolled to himself again and again Bharata’s 
strength of arm, amiability and goodness as well as his boundless devotion to the Lord’s 
feet. (60 A-B) 

886 

Chapter 177
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Now, there on Suvela Sri Rama uttered words befitting a mortal as He looked at 
Laksmana, “Although it is now past midnight, Hanuman has not yet turned up!” Sri Rama 
raised His younger brother and clasped him to His bosom. “Brother, you could never 
bear to see me in distress, since your disposition has always been so tender. On my 
account you left both father and mother and exposed yourself to the cold, the heat and 
the winds in the forest. Where is that old love now, brother, that you refuse to get up even 
on hearing my lament? Had I known that I would lose my brother in the forest, I would 
never have obeyed even my father’s command. Sons, riches, wives, houses and kinsfolk 
in this world repeatedly come and go; but a real brother cannot be had again in this world. 
Ponder this in your mind and arise, dear brother. As a bird is utterly miserable without 
wings, a serpent without its head-jewel and a noble elephant without its trunk, so is my 
life without you, brother, in case stupid fate compels me to survive. With what face 
shall I return to Ayodhya after sacrificing a beloved brother for the sake of wife. I would 
rather have suffered obloquy in the world (for my inability to recover my wife); for after 
all the loss of a wife is not a serious loss. Now, however, my unfeeling and stony 
heart will endure both that obloquy and the deep anguish of your loss, my son. Your 
mother’s only son, you are the sole prop of her life. Yet she took you by the hand and 
entrusted you to me, knowing that I would make you happy in everyway and that I am 
your greatest well-wisher. What answer shall I give her when I go back? Why should you 
not get up and advise me, brother?” Thus lamented the Dispeller of sorrow, in diverse 
ways; and tears flowed from His eyes which resembled the petals of a lotus. Uma, 
(continues Lord Siva,) the Lord of the Raghus is one (without a second) and indivisible; 
He exhibited the ways of human being only because He is so compassionate to His 
devotees. (1 — 9) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 887 

The hosts of monkeys that surrounded the Lord were distressed to hear the 
Lord’s frantic wailing. Presently arrived Hanuman like a heroic strain in the midst of 
pathos. (61) 
Transported with joy, Sri Rama embraced Hanuman; for the Lord is exceedingly 
grateful by nature and supremely wise. The physician (Susena) then immediately applied 
the mediceni and Laksmana cheerfully rose and sat up. The Lord clasped His brother to 
His heart and the whole host of bears and monkeys was rejoiced. Hanuman took the 
physician back to Lanka in the same way he had brought him previously night. When the 
ten-headed monster heard this news, he beat his head in utter despair again and again. 
In sore perplexity he called on Kumbhakarna (his younger brother) and succeeded in 
waking him by using all sorts of devices. Having woken and sat up, he looked like Death 
himself in a corporeal body. Kumbhakarna asked; “Tell me, brother, why do you look so 
withered up?” The haughty Ravana told him the whole story as to how he had carried 
off Sita “Dear brother, the monkeys have killed all the demons and extirpated the greatest 
warriors. Durmukha, Devantaka (the enemy of gods), Narantaka (the devourer of men), 
the mighty champions Atikaya (of enormous size) and Akampana (who never trembles in 
fear) and other heroes like Mahodara (the bigbellied), so staunch in battle, have all fallen 
on the field of battle.” (1 — 6) 
888 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
On hearing the words of his ten-headed brother, Kumbhakarna felt very sorry. “Having 
carried off the Mother of the universe, O fool, you still expect good out of it!” (62) 

Chapter 178
 “You have not acted well, O demon king. And now why have you come and woke 
me up? Yet, abandoning pride, worship Sri Rama and you will be blessed. Can the Lord 
of the Raghus, O ten-headed Ravana, be a man, who has couriers like Hanuman? Alas, 
brother, you acted unwisely in that you did not break this news to me earlier. You have 
courted war with the Divinity who has for His servants gods like Siva and Viranci (the 
Creator). I would have confided to you the secret which the sage Narada had once imparted 
to me; but the time has passed. Squeeze me, brother, in close embrace now, I may go 
now and bless my eyes with the sight of the Lord who has a swarthy complexion and 
lotus-like eyes and who relieves the threefold agony of His devotees.” (1 — 4) 
As he thought of Sri Rama’s beauty and virtues he forgot himself for a moment. 
In the meantime Ravana requisitioned (for his consumption) myriads of jars full of wine 
and a whole herd of buffaloes. (63) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 889 
Having feasted on the buffaloes and drunk off the wine, Kumbhakarna roared like 
a crash of lightning. Heavily drunk and full of passion for war, he sallied forth from the 
fort without any troops. When Vibhisana saw him, he came forward and falling at his feet 
told him his name. Kumbhakarna in his turn lifted his younger brother and clasped him 
to his bosom; he was delighted at heart to know that his brother was a devotee of Sri 
Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). “Dear brother, Ravana spurned me with his foot when 
I gave him a most salutary advice and told him my view. Disgusted with such treatment 
I came away to Sri Rama, and the Lord’s heart was drawn towards me when he 
perceived my distress.” “Listen, my son; Ravana is in the clutches of death and would 
not listen even to the best advice at this stage. Thrice blessed are you, Vibhisana; you 
have proved to be the ornament of the demon race. Brother, you have brought glory to 
our line by adoring Sri Rama, that ocean of beauty and felicity. (1 — 5) 
“In thought, word and deed you should guilelessly adore Sri Rama, who is staunch 
in battle. Now leave me; for, doomed as I am to death, brother, I can no longer distinguish 
between friend and foe.” (64) 

890 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 179
On hearing the words of his brother (Kumbhakarna) Vibhisana turned back and 
came into the presence of Sri Rama (the Ornament of the three spheres). “My lord, here 
comes Kumbhakarna, possessed of a body huge as a mountain and staunch in battle!” 
The moment the mighty monkeys heard this they rushed forth crying with joy. They 
plucked up trees and mountains and hurled them against Kumbhakarna gnashing their 
teeth all the while. The bears and monkeys threw myriads of mountain-peaks at him each 
time. But neither he felt daunted in spirit nor did he stir from his position in spite of the 
best efforts on the part of the monkeys to push him back, even like an elephant pelted 
with the fruits of the sun-plant. Thereupon Hanuman struck him with his fist and he fell 
to the earth beating his head in great confusion. Rising again he hit Hanuman back and 
the latter whirled round and immediately dropped to the ground. Next he overthrew Nala 
and Nila upon the ground and knocked down the warriors here, there and everywhere. 
The monkey host stampeded; in utter dismay none dared face him. (1 — 5) 
Having rendered unconscious Arigada and the other principal monkeys including 
Sugriva, Kumbhakarna, who was of unbounded might, nay, the very perfection of 
strength, pressed the king of the monkeys under his arm pit and went off. (65) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 891 

Uma, (continues Lord Siva,) the Lord of the Raghus played the part of a human 
being in the same way as Garuda (the mount of Bhagavan Visnu) would sport in the 
company of snakes. Otherwise how could He who devours Death himself with the mere 
knitting of His brows engage with any grace in such a battlex as this? He will thereby 
spread His fame, which will not only sanctify the whole world but will undoubtedly take 
across the ocean of mundane existence the people who sing it. Now Hanuman’s 
unconsciousness ceased and he woke and presently began to look about for Sugriva. 
Meanwhile Sugriva too recovered from his swoon and slipped out of Kumbhakarna’s grips, 
who had taken him for dead (and consequently loosened his grip). Kumbhakarna discovered 
his escape only when Sugriva bit off the monster’s nose and ears and ascended into the 
air roaring. The demon caught Sugriva by the foot and, having thus secured him, dashed 
him against the ground. Sugriva, however, rose with remarkable agility and hit his adversary 
back. The mighty hero Sugriva then returned into the Lord’s presence, shouting “Glory, 
glory, all glory to the merciful Lord!” Kumbhakarna felt sick at heart when he realized that 
he had been deprived of his nose and ears, and turned back in a fury. The monkey host 
was horror-stricken when they saw the monster, who was frightful by nature and looked 
more so in the absence of his nose and ears. (1 — 5) 
Raising a shout of “Glory, glory, all glory to the Jewel of Raghu’s race I” the monkeys 
rushed forward and rained upon him all at once a volley of rocks and trees. (66) 

892 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Maddened with the lust of battle, Kumbhakarna marched against the enemy like 
Death himself furious with rage. He seized and devoured myriads of monkeys, that 
looked like swarms of locusts entering a mountain cave. Seizing many more millions he 
crushed them against his body, and millions he levigated between his palms and mixed 
with the dust on the ground. Multitudes of bears and monkeys escaped through his 
mouth, nostrils and ears and ran away. Intoxicated with the frenzy of battle the demon 
stood in a challenging mood; as though the Creator had placed the whole universe at his 
disposal and he was going to devour it. All great warriors scuttled away from the battle- 
field and would not return under any persuasion whatsoever. They could neither see with 
their eyes nor hear any call. The demon host also sallied forth when they learnt that 
Kumbhakarna had dispersed the monkey army. Sri Rama saw the discomfiture of His 
forces and further perceived all kinds of enemy reinforcements pouring in. (1 — 4) 
 “Listen, Sugriva, Vibhisana and Laksmana; take care of the army while I test the 
might and man-power of this wretch,” said the lotus-eyed Lord. (67) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 893 
Taking His famous bow, known by the name of Sarhga, in His hand and with a 
quiver fastened to His waist, the Lord of the Raghus went forth to crush the enemy’s 
ranks. The Lord first twanged His bow: the sound was so piercing that the enemy host 
was deafened to hear it. f§rl Rama of unfailing resolve discharged a hundred thousand 
arrows, which sped like winged cobras. Numerous arrows flew in every direction; fierce 
demon warriors began to be mowed down. Feet, chest, head and arms were dismembered; 
while many a hero was cut into a hundred pieces. Whirling round and round, the 
wounded fell to the ground; the champions among them rose and, recovering themselves, 
would join battle again. They thundered like clouds even as the arrows struck them; while 
many of them took to flight at the very sight of the terrible arrows. Headless trunks 
rushed fiercely on with the cries of “Seize, seize, kill, kill.” (1 — 4) 
In a trice the Lord’s arrows mowed down the terrible demon host. All the arrows 
then made their way back into Sri Rama’s quiver. (68) 
894 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

When Kumbhakarna perceived and realized that the demon army had been wiped 
out in an instant, the formidable hero flew into a violent rage and gave a grim roar as 
that of a lion (the king of beasts). In his fury he tore up mountains by the roots and dashed 
them upon detachments of mighty monkey warriors. The Lord saw the huge mountains 
coming and shattered them with His arrows into dust as it were. The Lord of the Raghus 
once more pulled the string of His bow and indignantly discharged a volley of His 
exceedingly terrible shafts. The arrows entered and passed through his body like flashes 
of lightning disappearing into a cloud. Blood gushing out from his dark figure resembled 
spouts of red ochre shooting from a mountain of soot. Perceiving him in fluster, bears 
and monkeys dashed forward; the monster, however, laughed when the monkeys drew 
near. (1 — 4) 
He burst into a terrible roar and, seizing millions and millions of monkeys, 
dashed them to the ground like a huge elephant, swearing by his ten-headed brother 
the while. (69) 


* LANKA-KANDA* 895 
Hosts of bears and monkeys fled like flocks of sheep at the sight of a wolf. The 
monkeys and bears, O Bhavani, turned tail in terror, crying in a piteous voice. “Yonder 
demon is like unto a famine, which threatens to visit this land in the shape of the monkey 
host. Therefore, O Rama, Slayer of Khara, the cloud laden with the water of compassion, 
reliever of the suppliant’s, agony, save us, protect us.” The moment the Lord heard the 
pathetic words, He advanced to meet him, putting His bow and arrows in order, Placing 
His army in the rear the most powerful Rama marched ahead, full of indignation. Pulling 
the string of His bow, He fitted a hundred arrows to it; they flew and disappeared into 
the demon’s body. Even as the arrows struck him the demon rushed forth burning with 
rage; the mountains staggered and the earth shook as he ran. He tore up a rock; but the 
Glory of Raghu’s race cut off the arm that bore it. He then rushed forward with the rock 
in his left hand; but the Lord struck off even that arm to the ground. Thus shorn of his 
arms, the wretched resembled Mount Mandara without its wings. He cast a fierce look 
on the Lord as if ready to devour all the three spheres. (1 — 6) 

With a most terrible yell he rushed forth with his mouth wide open. The Siddhas 
and gods in the heavens shouted in great alarm “Ah, alas, dear me!” (70) 
896 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Perceiving the gods much alarmed, the All-merciful pulled the string of His bow right 
up to His ear and blocked the demon’s mouth with a flight of His arrows; yet he did not 
fall to the ground, most powerful as he was. With his mouth full of arrows he rushed 
forward like a living quiver of Death Himself. Then the Lord in His wrath took a sharp 
arrow and struck his head right off his body. The head dropped in front of his ten-headed 
brother, who was filled with agony at its sight like a snake that has lost its crest-jewel. 
The earth sunk beneath the weight of the terrible trunk that still sprinted there; thereupon 
the Lord cut it in two. The two pieces fell to the ground like a pair of mountains dropped 
from the heavens, crushing beneath them monkeys, bears and demons alike. His soul 
entered the Lord’s mouth in the form of a mass of light, to the astonishment of gods, 
sages and all. The gods sounded their kettle-drums in great exultation, extolled the Lord 
and rained down flowers in profusion. Having prayed to the Lord, all the gods went their 
way. Just at that moment arrived the celestial sage, Narada. Standing high in the air he 
sang Sri Hari’s praises in a delightful heroic strain, which pleased the Lord’s soul. The 
sage departed with the words “Pray, despatch this wretch (Ravana) quickly.” Sri Rama 
shone forth on the field of battle. (1 — 6) 
The Lord of the Raghus, the king of Kosala, who was matchless in strength, shone 
resplendent on the field of battle in the midst of bears and monkeys, with drops of 
perspiration on His face, His lotus eyes turned red and His person specked with 
particles of blood, and both His hands busy playing with His bow and arrow. Even Sesa 
(the serpent-god), says Tulasidasa, could not describe the Lord’s beauty despite his 
numerous tongues. 
LANKA-KANDA* 


897 


Sri Rama vouchsafed a place in his own abode to a vile demon, who was a mine of impurities! Girija, (continues Lord Him not. Siva,) dull-witted are those men who adore 

At the close of the day the two contending armies retired from the battle-field. The 
battle had proved exceedingly strenuous even to the stoutest warrior. But the monkey 
host waxed stronger by Sri Rama’s grace, even as fire blazes up when fed with straw. 
The ranks of the demons were thinning night and day like merit, which is exhausted by 
speaking of one’s good deeds with one’s own lips. The ten-headed monster made much 
lamentation, clasping his brother’s head to his bosom again and again. The women wept 
and beat their breast with their hands, paying tributes to his extraordinary majesty and 
strength. At that juncture Meghanada (Ravana’s eldest son) came and consoled his 
father by narrating a number of (reassuring) stories. “See my heroism tomorrow; I need 
not make any pretentious statement just now. I have had no occasion to show you, dear 
father, the strength which I acquired alongwith the chariot from my beloved deity.” While 
he rattled on in this manner the day broke and swarms of monkeys besieged all the four 
gates. On this side ranged the monkey and bear warriors terrible as death, while on the 
other side stood the demons exceedingly staunch in battle. Every champion fought for 
the victory of his own camp; the battle, O Garuda (says Kakabhusundi), defied all 
description. (1 — 6) 




898 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Mounting his charmed car Meghanada ascended into the air and roared with a 
terrible laugh, which struck the monkey host with terror. (72) 
He discharged a volley of lances, pikes, swords and scimitars as well as axes, 
bludgeons and stones, and other missiles and weapons of every description, terrible as 
a thunderbolt, and further rained down shafts in profusion. The sky was thickly covered 
with arrows on all sides, as though the clouds poured in torrents in the month of 
Bhadrapada, when the constellation Magha (the tenth in order of the twenty-seven 
Naksatras) is in the ascendant. The cries of “Seize, seize, kill, kill” filled every ear; but 
nobody knew who it was that struck them. Snatching up rocks and trees, the monkeys 

* LANKA-KANDA* 899 

sprang into the air; but they could not see him and returned sore disappointed. Meanwhile 
by his delusive power Meghanada had turned every rugged valley, path and mountain 
cave into a veritable aviary of arrows. The monkeys were confounded and did not know 
where to turn. They felt helpless like so many Mandaras thrown into prison as it were 
by Indra. The son of the windgod, Arigada, Nala, Nila and all the other mighty heroes were 
completely discomfited by him. Again he assailed with his shafts Laksmana, Sugriva, and 
Vibhisana and pierced their bodies through and through. Then he confronted the Lord of 
the Raghus Himself; the arrows he let fly turned into serpents even as they struck Sri 
Rama. The Slayer of Khara, who is all-independent, infinite and immutable, the one 
without a second, was overpowered by the serpents’ coils. Like an actor, He plays many 
a part, — He, the one, ever-free and omnipotent Lord. It was in order to invest the battle 
with a glory of its own that the Lord allowed Himself to be bound by a snare of serpents, 
even though the gods were dismayed at this sight. (1 — 7) 
Girija, (continues Lord Siva,) is it ever possible that the Lord, who is the all- 
pervading abode of the universe and whose name, when repeated enables the hermits 
to cut asunder the bonds of existence, should fall in bondage? (73) 

900 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The doing of Sri Rama when appearing in an embodied form, Bhavani, cannot be 
logically interpreted by the power of reason or speech. Realizing this those who know the 
truth about Him and are full of dispassion adore Sri Rama, discarding all theological 
speculation. Having thus thrown the monkey host into confusion, Ghananada (a synonym 
for Meghanada) at last revealed himself and began to pour abuses. Jambavan said, 
“Remain standing a while, O wretch!” When he heard this, his anger knew no bound. 
“Fool, I spared you only on account of your age. And yet you have had the audacity to 
challenge me, O vile creature!”So saying he hurled his glittering trident. Jambavan, 
however, caught it in his hand and, darting forward, struck Meghanada in the chest with 
it so vehemently that the enemy of gods reeled and fell to the ground. Once again 
Jambavan in his fury took Meghanada by the foot and, swinging him round, dashed him 
against the ground and thus showed him his strength. By virtue of the boon* (granted to 
him by the Creator), however, he died not for all his killing. Thereupon Jambavan seized 
him by the foot and tossed him into Lanka. At this end the celestial sage Narada 
despatched Garuda, who took no time in reaching by the side of Sri Rama. (1 — 5) 

The king of birds seized and devoured the whole swarm of snakes created by 
Meghanada’s demoniac power. The charm was thus dispelled and all the divisions of the 
monkey host rejoiced again. Armed with rocks, trees, stones, and claws, the monkeys 
rushed forth in their fury; while the demons took to their heels in utter confusion and 
climbed up the fort. (74 A-B) 

Chapter 179
 “Brahma (the Creator) has ordained the death of this wicked soul (Meghanada) at the hands of one 
who has neither slept nor taken any food for full twelve years. Given over to your service, Laksmana, O Chief 
of the Raghus, has known neither sleep nor food etc., ever since he came away from Ayodhya: I have come 
to know all this, O King of kings. Therefore, O Ruler of gods, command Laksmana to accompany me with all 
speed; for he is no other than Sesa, the supporter of the earth, and will doubtless slay this demon. 

* LANKA-KANDA* 901 
When Meghanada recovered from his swoon, he felt much ashamed to find his 
father before him. He speedily betook himself to a convenient mountain cave and 
resolved to perform a sacrifice which would render him invincible. At this end Vibhisana 
approached the Lord and told Him his considered view. “Listen, my lord of incomparable 
might and generosity: the wicked Meghanada, who is a past master in creating illusions 
and the scourge of heaven, is performing an unholy sacrifice. If, my lord, the sacrifice 
is allowed to be completed, he will not then be speedily conquered.” The Lord of the 
Raghus was highly gratified to hear this and summoned Arigada and many other 
monkeys. “Go with Laksmana, brethren all, and wreck the sacrifice. And it is for you, 
Laksmana, to kill him in battle. I am much distressed to find the gods in terror. You must 
finish him by force of your wit might or one way or other, mark me, brother, the demon 
must be put an end to. And Jambavan, Sugriva and Vibhisana, you three must keep by 
his side with your regiment.” When the Hero of Raghu’s line had finished His command, 
Laksmana, who was staunch in battle, girt the quiver by his side and strung his bow; and 
cherishing the Lord’s glory in his heart, he spoke in a voice deep as thunder, “If I return 
today without slaying him (Meghanada), let me no longer be called a servant of Sri Rama 

902 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


(the Lord of the Raghus). Nay, even if a hundred Sivas come to his help, I shall 
nonetheless kill him in the name of Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line).” (1 — 7) 

Bowing his head at the feet of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), Laksmana (who 
was none else than Lord Ananta or Sesa) set out at once, accompanied by champions 
like Arigada, Nila, Mayanda, Nala and Hanuman. (75) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 903 
Arriving there, the monkeys found him squatting and offering oblations of blood and 
live buffaloes to the sacrificial fire. The monkeys wrecked the whole sacrifice; yet, when 
the demon refused to stir, they proceeded to applaud him (ironically). Even then he did 
not quit his place; the monkeys thereupon went and caught him by the hair and, striking 
him with the foot one after the other, ran away. He rushed forth, trident in hand, while the 
monkeys fled before him and came where Sri Rama’s younger brother (Laksmana) stood 
at the head of his army. Driven by the wildest fury he came and shouted with a terrible 
roar again and again. The son of the wind-god and Arigada darted forward in great 
indignation: but he struck them on the breast with his trident and felled them to the 
ground. He then hurled his fierce trident at the Lord (Laksmana): but Ananta intercepted 
it with his arrow and broke it in two. Meanwhile the son of the wind-god and Prince 
Ahgada had risen again and struck him furiously; but he received no injury. When the 
heroes turned round thinking that the enemy could not be killed in spite of the best efforts, 
he rushed forth with a terrible yell. When Laksmana saw him coming furiously like Death 
himself, he let fly fierce arrows. The wretch, however, vanished out of sight the moment 
he saw arrow terrible as thunderbolt darting towards him. He fought in various guises, 
now revealing himself and now disappearing. The monkeys were filled with dismay when 
they saw that the enemy could not be conquered. Laksmana (the lord of serpents) 
thereupon flew into a towering rage. He made a firm resolve in his mind to dispose of 
the demon; for he thought, “I have played with this wretch long enough.” Recalling the 
might of Sri Rama (the Lord of Kosala), he defiantly fitted an arrow to his bow and shot 
it with such steady aim that it struck Meghanada full in the breast and the demon 
abandoned all false appearances at the moment of death. (1 — 8) 

He gave up his ghost with the words “Where is Rama’s younger brother 
(Laksmana)?” “Where is Rama?” On his lips. “Blessed indeed is your mother!” exclaimed 
Ahgada and Hanuman. (76) 

904 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Hanuman lifted him without any exertion and after placing him at the main gate of 
Lanka returned. Hearing of his death, the gods as well as the Gandharvas all appeared 
in the heavens in their aerial cars. Raining down flowers, they beat their drums and sang 
the spotless glory of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). “Glory to Lord Ananta! Glory 
to the support of the whole universe! You, O lord, have delivered the gods.” Having thus 
hymned his praises, the gods as well as the Siddhas went their way, while Laksmana 
arrived in the presence of the All-merciful. The moment the ten-headed monster heard 
the news of his son’s death, he dropped unconscious to the ground. Mandodari made 
grievous lamentation, beating her breast and crying in many ways. The citizens were all 
smitten with grief; everyone abused Ravana. (1 — 4) 
The ten-headed monster then consoled all the womenfolk in various ways. 
“Perceive and realize in your heart”, he said, “That the entire universe is perishable.” (77) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 905 

Chapter 180
Ravana taught them sound wisdom; though vile himself, his counsel was so pious 
and wholesome! Indeed there are hosts of people clever in instructing others; but those 
who practise good morals themselves are few and far between. When the night was over 
and the day broke, the bears and monkeys invested all the four gates. The ten-headed 
monster summoned his champions and said, “He whose heart quails before the enemy 
in battle had better withdraw even now; for if he turns his back on the field of battle, he 
will have to suffer for it. Relying on the strength of my own arm have I started enmity and 
shall give befitting reply to the enemy who has invaded us.” So saying, he got ready his 
chariot, swift as the wind, and all the musical instruments of war sounded. The heroes, 
who were all matchless in strength, rushed forth like a storm of soot. Numberless ill-omens 
occurred at that time; but, extremely proud of his might of arm, he heeded them not. 
(1-5) 
In his overweening pride he took no heed of the omens, whether good or bad. 
Weapons dropped from his hands and warriors fell down from their cars, while horses 
and elephants ran shrieking out of the line. Frightful jackals, vultures and donkeys gave 
a shrill cry while dogs whined in large numbers. And owls, like messengers of death, 
uttered most alarming notes. 
Can he ever expect prosperity and good omens and attain peace of mind even in 
dream, who is actively malevolent to the living creation, is hostile to Sri Rama and is 
steeped in the enjoyment of the senses, all under a spell of delusion? (78) 
906 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The demon host, which defied all calculation, marched. Complete in all its four 
limbs, viz., elephants and chariots, horse and foot, it was divided into many regiments 
and was equipped with mounts, cars and other conveyances of every description as well 
as with numerous banners and standards of diverse colour. Numberless troops of 
infuriated elephants marched like rainy clouds driven by the wind. There were multitudes 
of distinguished warriors wearing uniforms of various colours, all heroic in battle and 
conversant with many illusive devices. Thus the army was magnificent in every way and 
looked like the mustered array of the gallant deity presiding over the vernal season. Even 
as the host marched, the elephants guarding the eight quarters tottered, the ocean was 
stirred to its very depth and the mountains rocked. The dust rose in clouds that obscured 
the sun, the air became still and the earth was troubled. Drums and kettledrums made 
an awful din like the thundering of clouds at the time of universal destruction. Tabors, 
clarionettes and hautboys sounded the martial strain that gladdens the heart of champions. 
All the heroes roared like lions, each extolling his own might and valour. Ravana 
exclaimed; “Listen, my valiant warriors: wipe out the hordes of these bears and 
monkeys, while I shall slay the two brother princes.” So saying he ordered his army to 
march forward. When the monkeys received this news, they all rushed forth swearing by 
the name of Sri Rama. (1 — 7) 

* LANKA-KANDA 

The gigantic monkeys and bears, who were terrible as death, rushed forward like 
hosts of winged mountains of diverse colour. With claws and teeth, rocks and huge trees 
for their weapons they were all very powerful and knew no fear. They shouted “Glory to 
Sri Rama, a veritable lion for the wild elephant in the shape of Ravana” and sang His 
praises. 
With a shout of “Victory! victory!!” on both sides and each finding his own match, 
the heroes came to a close combat, the monkeys singing the glory of f§rl Rama and the 
demons extolling Ravana. (79) 
908 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Vibhisana was disconcerted when he saw Ravana mounted on a chariot and the 
Hero of Raghu’s line without any. His great fondness for the Lord filled his mind with 
diffidence; and bowing to His feet he spoke with a tender heart: “My lord, You have no 
chariot nor any protection either for Your body (in the shape of armour) or for Your feet 
(in the shape of shoes). How, then, can You expect to conquer this mighty hero?” 
“Listen, friend:” replied the All-merciful, “the chariot which leads one to victory is quite 
another. Valour and fortitude are the wheels of that chariot, while truthfulness and good 
conduct are its enduring banner and standard. Even so strength, discretion, self-control 
and benevolence are its four horses, that have been joined to the chariot with the cords 
of forgiveness, compassion and evenness of mind. Adoration of God is the expert driver; 
dispassion, the shield and contentment, the sword. Again, charity is the axe; reason, the 
fierce lance and the highest wisdom, the relentless bow. A pure and steady mind is like 
a quiver; while quietude and the various forms of abstinence (Yamas) and religious 
observances (Niyamas) are a sheaf of arrows. Homage to the Brahmanas and to one’s 
own preceptor is an impenetrable coat of mail; there is no other equipment for victory as 
efficacious as this. My friend, he who owns such a chariot of piety shall have no enemy 
to conquer anywhere.” (1 — 6) 
 “Listen, O friend of resolute mind: the hero who happens to be in possession of such 
a strong chariot can conquer even that mighty and invincible foe, attachment to the world.” 
Hearing the Lord’s words, Vibhisana clasped His lotus feet in joy. “You have utilized this 
opportunity to exhort me, O Rama, an embodiment of grace and bliss that You are.” On that 
side the ten-headed Ravana threw his challenge, while on this side Ahgada and Hanuman 
invited him to a contest. The demons, on the one hand, and the bears and monkeys, on the 
other, steadily fought, each side swearing by its lord. (80 A — C) 
LANKA-KANDA* 


909 

Chapter 180

Brahma and the other gods, as well as a number of Siddhas and sages mounted 
their aerial cars and watched the contest from the heavens. I too, Uma (continues Lord 
Siva,) happened to be in that company and witnessed Sri Rama’s exploits replete with 
martial zeal. The champions of both sides were maddened with a passion for war; the 
monkeys, however, led the field through the might of Sri Rama. With shouts of defiance 
they closed in single combat, each crushing his adversary and throwing him to the 
ground. They smote the enemy, hacked him to pieces, clutched him and dashed him to 
the ground; nay, they tore his head off and pelted another with the same. They ripped 
up bellies, plucked up arms and, seizing the opponent by the foot, dashed him to the 
ground. The bears buried the demon warriors underground and piled over them large 
heaps of sand. The gallant monkeys on the battlefield looked like so many infuriated 
forms of Death as they desperately fought against the enemy. (1 — 4) 

910 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Their bodies streaming with blood, the powerful monkey warriors looked like the 
god of death in fury. Crushing the champions of the demon host they roared like thunder- 
clouds. They slapped and browbeat their opponents, bit them and trampled them under 
foot. The monkeys and bears sent out a shrill cry and employed every stratagem to 
annihilate the miscreant host. They seized and tore open the cheeks, ripped up the 
bellies and hung the entrails round their necks, as though the lord of Prahlada (Bhagavan 
Nrsimha) had assumed a multiplicity of forms and sported on the field of death. The 
savage cries of “Seize, smite, cut to pieces and knock down!” filled both heaven and 
earth. Glory to Sri Rama, who can actually convert a blade of grass into a thunderbolt 
and vice versa. (1 — 2) 
When the ten-headed Ravana saw his troops breaking, he mounted his chariot 
and drawing ten bows in his twenty arms turned round, shouting in great fury “Turn back, 
turn back.” (81) 
The wrath of the ten-headed monster knew no bound as he darted forward. But 
the monkeys also hurried to confront him shouting with glee. Taking in their hands trees, 
stones and rocks, they hurled them upon him all at once. The rocks broke to pieces the 
* LANKA-KANDA* 911 

moment they struck his adamantine frame. Ravana, who was maddened with the lust for 
war and most furious by temperament, flinched not but remained firm as a rock, planting 
his chariot where it stood. Burning all over with rage he darted and bullied hither and 
thither and started crushing the monkey warriors. Many a bear and monkey took to his 
heel, crying: “Help, help, Arigada and Hanuman! Save, save, O Lord Raghuvira (Hero 
of Raghu’s line)! This wretch is devouring us like Death.” When the monster saw that all 
the monkeys had fled, he fitted an arrow to each of his ten bows. (1 — 4) 
Fitting an arrow to each of his bows, he shot a volley of arrows, which flew and 
lodged like winged serpents. The shafts filled all available space on earth as well as in 
the heavens including the eight quarters, so that the monkeys knew not where to go. 
There was a wild uproar in the ranks of the monkeys and bears, who were all sore 
distressed and cried in anguish: “O Hero of Raghu’s line, O Ocean of mercy, O 
Befriender of the distressed, O Hari, O Saviour of mankind!” 
Seeing the distress of his troops Laksmana fastened the quiver to his waist; and 
taking the bow in his hand he bowed his head at Sri Rama’s feet and sallied forth, full 
of rage. (82) 


912 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Pooh! You are making the monkeys and bears your target, O vile wretch; look at 
me, I am your death.” “It is you whom I have been looking for, you slayer of my son. Today 
I will soothe my heart by killing you.” So saying he discharged a flight of fierce arrows; 
but Laksmana shivered them into a hundred pieces each. Nay, Ravana hurled upon him 
myriads of other missiles, but Laksmana foiled them all by reducing them to particles as 
small as sesamum seeds. Again, Laksmana assailed him with his own shafts, smashing 
his chariot and killing the charioteer. Nay, each of his ten heads he transfixed with a 
hundred arrows, which seemed like serpents boring their way into the peaks of a 
mountain. With a hundred arrows more he struck him in the breast: he fell senseless to 
the ground. On regaining his consciousness the mighty demon rose again and hurled a 
lance that had been bestowed on him by Brahma (the Creator). (1 — 4) 

That fierce lance, the gift of Brahma, struck Lord Ananta (Laksmana) right in the 
breast and the hero dropped to the ground full of agony. The ten-headed monster tried 
to lift the Prince and carry him off, but the glory of the demon’s matchless strength 
proved ineffective. How foolish it was on the part of Ravana to have sought to lift him 
on one of whose (thousand) heads rest all the spheres of the universe like a mere grain 
of sand. He little knew that he was no other than the Lord of the three spheres. 
The son of the wind-god, who perceived this, rushed forward speaking harsh 
words; but even as the monkey came near, the monster struck him a terrible blow with 
his fist. (83) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 913 

Chapter 181
Hanuman sank on his knees but did not fall to the ground. Recovering himself, he 
rose in exceeding wrath and struck Ravana a blow with his fist; the demon fell like a 
mountain struck by lightning. When the spell of his swoon was over and consciousness 
returned to him, he began to admire the monkey’s enormous strength. “Shame on my 
valour and shame on myself, if you are still alive, you enemy of gods!” So saying, Hanuman 
carried Laksmana off to Sri Rama : the ten-headed monster was amazed at this sight. 
Said the Hero of Raghu’s line, “Bear in mind, brother, that you are the devourer of Death 
and the saviour of the gods.” Immediately, on hearing these words the gracious prince 
(Laksmana) arose and sat up, while the fierce lance vanished into the heavens. Taking 
his bow and arrows again he darted and came post-haste in front of the enemy. (1 — 4) 
With great despatch Laksmana smashed Ravana’s chariot again and struck down 
his charioteer, who felt writhing with pain. Ravana, whose heart he transfixed with a 
hundred arrows, fell to the ground, much distressed. Another charioteer came and laid 
him in his own chariot and immediately took him away to Lanka; while Laksmana, Sri 
Rama’s glorious brother, bowed at the Lord’s feet again. 

914 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
At the other end the ten-headed monster, on coming to himself, set to perform 
some sacrifice. In his perversity and rank ignorance the fool sought to gain victory even 
by antagonizing Sri Rama! (84) 
At this end Vibhisana got all the information and, hastening to the Lord of the 
Raghus, apprised Him of everything. “My lord, Ravana is busy with a sacrificial 
performance; and if he completes it, the wretch will never die. Therefore, my lord, 
despatch some valiant monkeys at once, so that they may wreck his sacrifice, and the 
ten-headed monster be compelled to return.” As soon as the day broke the Lord sent out 
His champions — Hanuman, Arigada and others — who all rushed forward. In mere sport 
the monkeys sprang up to the fort of Lanka and fearlessly entered Ravana’s palace. The 
moment they saw him engaged in a sacrifice all the monkeys grew wildly furious. “You 
shameless wretch, having run away home from the battle, you have sat down here and 
feigned meditation!” So saying Arigada struck him with his foot; but the fool did not even 
look at them, his mind being absorbed in the pursuit of his own end. (1 — 4) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 915 

When he refused to look at them, the monkeys in their fury bit him with their teeth 
and kicked him. His wives too they seized by their locks and dragged out of doors while 
they cried most piteously. Then at last he rose, furious as Death, and, catching hold of 
the monkeys by their legs, he threw them away. Meanwhile, when he saw that the 
monkeys had wrecked the sacrifice, he felt discomfited at heart. 
Having wrecked his sacrifice the monkeys safely returned to the Lord of the Raghus; while the demon (Ravana) set out ablaze with fury, abandoning all hope of life. (85) 
Evil omens of a most fearful nature occurred to him even as he went. Vultures flew 
and perched on his heads. Being in the jaws of death, he paid no heed to anyone and 
exclaimed : “Beat the drums of war.” The demon host appeared endless as it marched 
on with its myriads of elephants, chariots, foot-soldiers and horsemen. The wicked 
demons rushed to face the Lord like a swarm of moths darting towards fire. At this end 
the gods prayed to the Lord : “This fellow (Ravana) has inflicted terrible suffering on us. 
Play with him no more, Rama; Videha’s Daughter (Sita) is feeling most disconsolate.” 
The Lord smiled to hear the gods’ prayer; the Hero of Raghu’s line rose and put His 
916 

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

arrows in order. The matted locks on His head had been tightly coiled and were interlaced 
with flowers. With His ruddy eyes and body dark as a rain-cloud He ravished the eyes 
of the whole world. He fastened His quiver to a piece of cloth girt round His loins and 
took in His hand formidable Sarriga bow. (1 — 5) 

The Lord took the Sarriga bow in His hand and fastened to His waist the beautiful 
quiver with an inexhaustible stock of arrows. He had a pair of muscular arms and a 
charming and broad chest which was adorned with the print of the Brahmana’s (Bhrgu’s) 
foot. When the Lord, says Tulasidasa, commenced feeling the bow and arrow with His 
hands, the whole universe, including the elephants guarding the eight quarters, the divine 
Tortoise, the serpent-god (Sesa) and the earth with its oceans and mountains, began to 
tremble. 
The gods rejoiced to see His beauty and rained down flowers in an endless 
shower, exclaiming “Glory, glory, all glory to the Fountain of mercy, the storehouse of 
beauty, strength and goodness.” (86) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 917 

Chapter 182
Meanwhile arrived the vast demon host with its overcrowded ranks. The moment 
the monkey warriors saw the army they advanced to meet it like the masses of clouds 
that gather at the time of universal destruction. A numberless swords and claymores 
flashed like gleams of lightning from every direction. The shrill cries of the elephants and 
horses and the rattling sound of the chariots resembled the terrible thundering of clouds. 
Myriads of monkeys’ tails stretched across the heavens like an array of magnificent 
rainbows appearing in the sky. The dust rose in thick columns like streams of water in 
the air and the arrows shot forth in an endless shower like rain-drops. Mountains hurled 
from either side crashed like repeated strokes of lightning. The Lord of the Raghus in His 
fury let fly arrows in showers, which straightway wounded the demon crew. The demon 
warriors shrieked with pain as the arrows struck them; and swinging round and round 
they fell to the ground here, there and everywhere. Streaming with blood, the wounded 
demons looked like mountains with their large cascades; and the blood ran in the form 
of a river, the terror of cowards. (1 — 5) 
A most unholy river of blood, that smote recreants with terror, ran across the 
battlefield. With the two armies for its banks, the chariots for its intervening sands and 
their wheels for its whirlpools, it was a frightful flood indeed. The foot-soldiers, and even 
so elephants, horses, donkeys and other mounts of all kinds, more than one could count, 
(that floated on the river) represented the various aquatic creatures; the arrows, lances 
and iron clubs (swept by it) stood for its serpents: the bows borne along the current 
represented its waves and the shields stood for its many tortoises. 
918 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Warriors fell here and there like the trees on its banks and the abundant, marrow 
of their bones represented its scum. Dastards shuddered at its very sight, while 
champions were delighted at heart to see it. (87) 
Spirits, ghouls and goblins and even so frightful genii with a long shaggy mass of 
hair and Pramathas (Siva’s own attendants) took their plunge in it. Crows and kites flew 
off with human arms, which they tore from one another and ate themselves. Some said, 
“What a pity, fools that you should continue to suffer from want even in such plenty?” 
Wounded warriors fallen on the banks groaned like the moribund lying all round half in 
and half out of water (on the bank of a sacred river, lake etc., in order to ensure that they 
may breathe their last while their body is being washed by the sacred water since such 
a death is accounted as highly beneficial to the spirit of the dying man). Standing on its 
banks, vultures tore the entrails of the dead like fishermen angling with rapt attention. 
Many a dead warrior floated down with birds perched on them, as if the latter were 
enjoying a game of boating on the river. The Yoginis (female attendants of Goddess 
Durga) took to storing blood in skulls, while female spirits and sprites danced in the air. 
Even so Camundas (another class of female attendants of Durga) sang songs in various 
strains, clashing the skulls of dead warriors like so many pairs of cymbals. Herds of 
Jackals snapped their teeth as they tore the dead, feasted upon them and yelled; and, 
when surfeited, they snarled. Myriads of headless trunks trotted along the battlefield, 
while the heads lying on the ground shouted “Victory! Victory!!” (1 — 5) 

LANKA-KANDA* 


919 

The heads shouted “Victory! Victory!!” while headless trunks darted wildly about. 
Birds got entangled in skulls even as they contended with one another; while champions 
overthrew their rivals. Imperious through Sri Rama’s strength, the monkeys crushed the 
demon crew; and mortally struck by Sri Rama’s flight of arrows, the champions lay in 
eternal sleep on the field of death. 
Ravana thought within himself, “The demons have been wiped out and I am left 
alone, while the monkeys are still numerous. Let me, therefore, resort to conjuring without 
any limit.” (88) 

When the gods saw that the Lord was on foot, they were exceedingly troubled at 

920 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
heart. Indra (the lord of heaven) forthwith despatched his own chariot, which Matali 
(Indra’s charioteer) gladly brought there. It was a heavenly and unique car, which was 
all splendour; the King of Kosalapura (Ayodhya) gladly mounted it. It was driven by four 
high-spirited and charming horses, which knew no decay or death and flew as fast as 
mind. The monkeys rushed forward with renewed vigour when they saw the Lord of the 
Raghus mounted on a chariot. When Ravana felt that the monkey’s onset was irresistible, 
he took to creating illusions. The illusive creation did not touch the Lord of the Raghus; 
while the monkeys, nay, even Laksmana took it for real. The monkeys saw among a large 
demon host a number of Ramas and as many Laksmana. (1 — 4) 
The monkeys and bears were much terrified at heart to see numerous Ramas and 
Laksmanas. All of them, including Laksmana, stood gazing like the figures in a picture 
wherever they were. The Lord of Kosala smiled to see His army at a nonplus; He fitted 
an arrow to His bow and in a trice Sri Hari dispersed the Maya to the delight of the whole 
monkey host. 
Sri Rama then cast His glance on all and spoke in serene words: “Watch now my 
duel (with Ravana); for all of you, my heroes, are extremely tired.” (89) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 921 
So saying, the Lord of the Raghus bowed His head at the Brahmanas’ lotus feet 
even as He urged forward His chariot. Thereupon Ravana felt much enraged at heart 
and darted to meet Him, challenging Him in a thundering voice: “Listen, hermit: I am not 
like one of those warriors whom you have vanquished in battle. My name is Ravana, 
whose glory is known all the world over, and whose prison holds within its walls the 
regents of the spheres! You slew Khara, Dusana and Viradha and killed poor Vali even 
as a hunter would shoot his game. Nay, you wiped out a host of demon champions and 
killed even Kumbhakarna and Meghanada. Today I will, wreak vengeance on you for all 
this unless, O prince, you flee away from the battle. Today I will surely give you over 
to death; for it is the relentless Ravana whom you have to deal with.” Hearing his foul 
talk the All-merciful took him as doomed to death and smilingly replied as follows: “True, 
true is all your greatness. But prate no more; show your valour if you can. (1 — 5) 
 “Do not ruin your reputation by bragging. Pray, excuse me and listen to a sound 
maxim. There are three types of men in this world — those resembling the rose, the 
mango and the bread-tree respectively. The one gives flowers alone, the second flowers 
and fruit both and the third yields fruit alone. Even so the one talks, the second talks as 
well as does, while the third does but never goes about proclaiming it.” 

922 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Ravana heartily laughed when he heard Sri Rama’s words. “Ah! You teach me 
wisdom! You did not shrink from waging war against me then; now it seems you aseafraid 
of death.” (90) 

Having uttered these taunting words Ravana furiously began to discharge arrows 
like so many thunderbolts. Shafts of various designs flew and filled all the quarters, nay, 
every corner of the earth and heavens. The Hero of Raghu’s line let fly a fiery dart, and 
in a moment the demon’s bolts were all consumed. Ravana ground his teeth out of 
frustration and hurled a fierce lance; but the Lord sent it back alongwith His arrow. The 
demon then hurled crores of discs and tridents; but the Lord frustrated them by tearing 
them asunder without any exertion. Ravana’s arrows proved as futile as the schemes of 
the wicked invariably are. Then with a hundred arrows he struck Sri Rama’s charioteer 
(Matali), who fell to the ground crying “Victory to Sri Rama!” Sri Rama took compassion 
and lifted up the driver; He was now stirred up with a terrible fury. (1 — 4) 
When the Lord of the Raghus encountered the enemy on the battlefield, full of 
rage, the arrows in His quiver vied with one another in their endeavour to shoot forth. The 




* LANKA-KANDA* 923 

man-eating demons were all seized with terror at the sound of the most awful twang of 
His bow. Mandodari’s heart quaked; the ocean, the Tortoise supporting the globe, the 
earth and the mountains trembled; and the elephants guarding the quarters squealed, and 
clutched the globe with their tusks. The gods smiled at this amusing sight. 
Sri Rama drew the bow-string right up to His ear and let fly His terrible darts, 
which sped forth vibrating like so many serpents. (91) 
924 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


The arrows flew like winged serpents. At the first onset they killed Ravana’s 
charioteer and horses; then, smashing the car, they tore off his ensign and flags. Even 
though his strength had inwardly failed him, he roared aloud and, immediately mounting 
another car, ground his teeth and hurled missiles and other weapons of every description. 
All his efforts, however, failed like those of a man whose mind is ever intent on harming 
others. Then Ravana hurled forth ten pikes, which struck the four horses of Sri Rama’s 
chariot and overthrew them. The Lord raised His horses and, drawing the bow string, let 
fly His darts in great fury. The arrows of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) sped forth 
like a string of bees* to enter Ravana’s heads, which compared a bed of lotuses. Sri 
Rama struck each of his brows with ten arrows, which pierced through them; and blood 
gushed forth in torrents. Though bleeding profusely, the mighty demon rushed forward; 
the Lord once more fitted arrows to His bow. The Hero of Raghu’s line discharged thirty 
shafts, which shot down his heads and arms to the ground. But they grew afresh as 
soon as they were severed; Sri Rama, however, struck off his heads and arms once 
more. Time after time the Lord smote off his arms and heads; but they were renewed as 
soon as they were blown off. Again and again the Lord tore off his arms and heads; for 
the King of Kosala takes delight in playing. The sky was full of heads and arms like an 
infinite number of Ketus and Rahus. (1 — 7) 

It seemed as though multitudes of Rahus and Ketus were rushing through the air, 
streaming with blood; hit by the terrible shafts of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) 
again and again, they could not fall to the ground. The arrows, as they flew through the 
air, each transfixing a set of heads, seemed like so many rays of the angry sun each 
strung all over with a number of Rahus. 
As quickly as the Lord struck off his heads, they were renewed without end, like 
the passions of a man, which grow ever more and more even as he enjoys the pleasures 
of sense. (92) 

* “The word ‘SilTmukha’ in the original bears a double meaning. It denotes both an arrow and a bee. 
Hence the sentence has been translated as above.” 




* LANKA-KANDA* 925 
When the ten-headed monster perceived the multiplication of his heads, he thought 
no more of his own death, but was seized with burning wrath. The fool roared in his great 
pride and rushed forward with all his ten bows drawn. Flying into a rage on the battle- 
field, the ten-headed monster discharged a shower of arrows and screened with it the 
chariot of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), which was lost to sight for nearly half an 
hour, even as the sun is obscured by mist. When the gods raised a piteous cry, the Lord 
took up His bow, full of wrath. Making in effective the enemy’s arrows He cut off his heads, 
which covered all the quarters as well as the intermediate points of the compass, as well 
as heaven and earth. The severed heads flew through the air and struck terror into the 
monkeys’ hearts as they uttered the cries of “Victory, Victory!! Where is Laksmana? 
Where is Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys? Where is the hero of Raghu’s line, the lord 
of Kosala?” (1—4) 
“Where is Rama?” cried the multitudes of heads as they sped. The monkeys took 
to flight as they saw them. The Jewel of Raghu’s line smilingly fitted arrows to His bow 
and shot the heads through and through. Taking a rosary of skulls in their hands a large 




926 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


number of Kalikas (female attendants of Goddess Kali) collected in numerous batches, 
as though having bathed in the stream of blood they had proceeded to worship the banyan 
tree of the battle. 
Then the ten-headed monster in his fury hurled forth his terrible lance, which flew 
straight towards Vibhisana like the rod of Death. (93) 

Chapter 183
When the Lord saw the most fearful lance coming, He thought to Himself, “It is My 
sacred vow to put an end to the distress of the suppliant!” Instantly Sri Rama put 
Vibhisana behind Him and exposed Himself to the full force of the spear. When the lance 
struck Him, the Lord fainted for a while. Although it was a mere sport on the part of the 

Lord, the gods were filled with dismay. When Vibhisana saw that the Lord had been 

grievously hurt, he seized his club and rushed forward full of rage. “You wretched vile 
and perverse fool! You have antagonized gods, human beings, sages and Nagas alike. 
You devoutly offered your heads to Lord Siva and have got millions for one in return. It 
is for this reason, O wretch, that you have been spared till this time; your death, 
however, seems to be impending now. Fool, you seek happiness through enmity with Sri 
Rama?” So saying, Vibhisana struck his brother right on the chest with his club. (1 — 4) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 927 

At the terrible impact of the mighty club on his chest Ravana fell to the ground, all 
his ten mouths spouting blood. But he picked himself up again and darted forward full of 
fury. The two mighty champions closed with each other in a wrestling contest, each 
mauling the other. Vibhisana, however, who was inspired with the strength of Sri Rama 
(the Hero of Raghu’s line), deemed his adversary as of no account. 
Uma, (continues Lord Siva,) Vibhisana would never have dared of himself to look 
Ravana in the face. Armed with the might of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line), 
however, he now closed with his brother like Death himself. (94) 

Perceiving Vibhisana much exhausted, Hanuman rushed forward with a rock in 
his hand; crushing the chariot, the horses and the charioteer all at once he gave Ravana 
a kick right in his breast. The demon, however, kept standing though shaking violently 
all over. Meanwhile Vibhisana withdrew into the presence of §ri Rama (the Protector of 
928 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
His devotees). Ravana thereupon challenged and assailed the monkey (Hanuman), who 
ascended into the air spreading his tail. Ravana laid hold of his tail, but the monkey 
(Hanuman) flew alongwith him. The mighty Hanuman then turned and closed with him. 
The two well-matched warriors fought overhead, each striking the other in great fury. 
Putting forth all their strength and stratagem while in the air the two looked like a 
mountain of soot and Mount Sumeru contending with each other. When the demon could 
not be overthrown either through wit or through physical force, the son of the wind-god 
invoked his lord. (1 — 4) 
Invoking the Hero of Raghu’s line, the strong-minded Hanuman challenged and 
struck Ravana. The two fell to the ground and rising again resumed fighting. The gods 
shouted ‘Victory’ to both. Seeing Hanuman in such a strait, the monkeys and bears 
sallied forth in furious haste; while Ravana, who was battle-mad, crushed all the 
champions by the tremendous might of his arm. 

Then, rallied by the Hero of Raghu’s line, the fierce monkeys rushed forward. Seeing 
the overwhelming monkey host, Ravana, however, displayed his Maya (black art). (95) 
929 

Chapter 184

He became invisible for a moment and then the wretch revealed himself in 
multitudinous forms. The ten-headed monster appeared in as many forms as there were 
bears and monkeys in the army of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). The monkey host 
beheld numberless Ravanas; the bears and monkeys then fled in every direction. The 
monkeys had no courage to stay. They fled crying, “Help, Laksmana! Help, Raghuvira 
(Hero of Raghu’s line) !” Myriads of Ravanas darted in all directions, thundering in a deep, 
shrill and frightful voice. All the gods took flight in panic crying, “Now, brethren, abandon 
all hope of victory. A single Ravana subdued the whole heavenly host. Now that he has 
been multiplied, let us seek mountain caves.” Only Brahma (the Creator), Lord Sambhu 
(Siva) and the wise seers, whoever knew something of the Lord’s glory, remained 
unshaken. (1 — 4) 
They who understood the Lord’s might remained fearless. But the monkeys took 
the apparitions for real enemies. They all lost courage and fled, monkeys and bears alike, 
crying in their dismay: “Protect us, our merciful lord!” The most powerful Hanuman, 
Ahgada, Nila and Nala, who were all valiant in battle, fought and crushed the myriads of 
gallant Ravanas that had sprouted on the soil of deception. 

The Lord of Kosala smiled to see the dismay of the gods and the monkeys. He 
fitted or arrow to His famous Sarriga bow and wiped out the whole host of illusive Ravana. 

930 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

In a trice the Lord dispersed the whole phantom, even as the veil of darkness is 
torn asunder with the rising of the sun. The gods rejoiced to see only one Ravana and, 
turning back, rained abundant flowers on the Lord. Raising His arm, the Lord of the 
Raghus rallied the monkeys, who returned, each shouting to other. Inspired by the 
might of their lord, the bears and monkeys ran; and leaping briskly they arrived on the 
battlefield. When Ravana saw the gods extolling Sri Rama, he thought to himself, “They 
think I am now reduced to one.” “Fools ! you have ever been victims of my thrashing !” 
So saying he sprang into the air with great indignation. As the gods fled uttering a piteous 
cry, Ravana said, “Wretches whither can you go from my presence?” Seeing the 
distress of the gods, Arigada rushed forward and with a bound seized Ravana by the foot 
and threw him to the ground. (1 — 4) 
Having seized Ravana and thrown him to the ground, Vali’s son (Arigada) gave 
him a kick and then rejoined his lord. The ten-headed monster, on recovering himself, 
rose again and roared terribly in a shrill voice. Proudly drawing the string of all his 
ten bows he fitted a dart to each and rained a flight of arrows, wounding all the warriors 
in the enemy’s ranks to their utter dismay and confusion; and rejoiced to see his own 
might. 
* LANKA-KANDA* 931 
Thereupon the Lord of the Raghus tore off Ravana’s heads and arms, alongwith 
the arrows and bows; more than once. But each time they all multiplied like sins 
committed in a holy place. (97) 
The bears and monkeys grew furious when they saw the repeated renewal of 
Ravana’s heads and arms. “This fool would not die even though his arms and heads are 
932 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
cut off!” So saying, the bear and monkey warriors darted towards him in great fury. Vali’s 
son (Arigada), the son of the wind-god, Nala, Nila, Sugriva (the king of the monkeys) and 
Dwivida, all mighty heroes, hurled trees and rocks on him. Ravana, however, caught 
them and threw the same back upon the monkeys. Some of the monkeys tore the 
enemy’s body with their claws, while others would kick him and run away. Then Nala and 
Nila climbed up his heads and set to tearing his foreheads with their claws. When he saw 
blood coming, he felt much troubled at heart and moved up his arms to catch hold of the 
monkeys. But they were not to be caught and leapt about from one hand to another like 
a pair of bees hovering over a bed of lotuses. At last with a furious bound he clutched 
them both; but before he could dash them to the ground, they twisted his arms and ran 
away. Again in his fury he took ten bows in his hands and with his arrows struck and 
wounded the monkeys. Having rendered Hanuman and other monkey chiefs senseless 
he rejoiced to see the approach of night. Seeing all the monkey heroes in a swoon the 
valiant Jambavan rushed forward with a host of bears carrying rocks and trees, which 
they hurled upon him, challenging him again and again. This enraged the mighty Ravana, 
who seized a number of the warriors by the foot and began dashing them to the ground. 
Jambavan (the king of the bears) flew into a rage when he saw the havoc wrought on 
his host, and gave Ravana a kick on the breast. (1 — 8) 
The violent impact of the foot on his breast made Ravana senseless and he fell 
from his chariot to the ground, grasping a bear in each of his twenty hands, like bees 
reposing by night in the folds of the lotus. Seeing him unconscious, the king of the bears 
struck him with his foot once more and rejoined the Lord. Perceiving that it was night, 
the charioteer lifted him on to his chariot and then tried to bring him back to his senses. 

On recovering from their swoon the bears and monkeys all arrived in the presence 
of the Lord, while all the demons stood round Ravana in great consternation. (98) 
That very night the demoness Trijata called on Slta and told Her the whole story. 
When Sita heard of the renewal of the enemy’s heads and arms, She felt much dismayed 
at heart. She wore a doleful countenance and Her mind was filled with anxiety. Then Sita 
addressed Trijata thus : “Why do you not tell me, mother, what is going to happen? How 
can this plague of the universe be obliterated? He does not die even though the arrows 
of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) have cut asunder his heads. It is Heaven who is 
disposing of things perversely. Nay, it is my ill luck that sustains him, the same misfortune 
which separated me from Sri Hari’s lotus-feet. The fate which created the phantom of a 
illusory deer of gold still frowns at me. The same Providence who made me suffer terrible 
woes and prompted me to speak harsh words to Laksmana, nay, who pierced me through 
and through time and again with the mighty and poisoned shafts of separation from the 
Lord of the Raghus, and who keeps me alive even under such trying circumstances — it 
is He and He alone who is conserving Ravana’s life.” With many such words did Janaka’s 
Daughter make lament as She recalled to Her mind the All-merciful. Trijata replied: 
“Listen, O Princess: the enemy of the gods will surely die if an arrow pierces his breast. 
But the Lord is careful not to strike him there; for He knows that Videha’s Daughter 
(Yourself) abides in his heart. (1 — 7) 

934 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

“He is prevented by the thought that Janaka’s Daughter dwells in Ravana’s heart 
and that Janaki’s heart is His own abode; in His belly, again, are contained the 
numberless spheres, which will all perish the moment His arrow pierces Ravana’s heart.” 
Trijata’s explanation filled Sita’s mind with both joy and sorrow in a superlative degree. 
Perceiving this Trijata spoke again: “Now listen, fair lady, how your enemy will meet his 
death, and shake off the great misgiving which still haunts your mind.” 
 “Ravana will get disconcerted when his heads are cut off, with the result that you 
will escape his mind. That particular moment will the all-wise Sri Rama strike him in his 
heart.” (99) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 935 

With many such words did Trijata comfort Sita and then returned to her residence. 
As She recalled Sri Rama’s kind disposition Videha’s Daughter was overwhelmed with 
the anguish of separation from Him. She reproached the night and the moon in many 
ways. “The night has already assumed the length of an age and does not end” She 
added. Disconsolate at Her separation from Sri Rama, Janaka’s Daughter grievously 
lamented within Herself. When Her agony of separation grew acute, Her left eye and arm 
throbbed. Considering it to be a good omen, She took heart and said to Herself, “The 
gracious Hero of Raghu’s line will surely meet me.” In his palace Ravana recovered from 
his swoon at midnight and cut up rough with his charioteer, “Fool, to have severed me 
from the battlefield; shame, shame on you, O vile dullard!” The charioteer clasped his 
feet and admonished in many ways. As soon as it was dawn Ravana mounted his car 
and sallied forth again. There was a great stir in the monkey host at the news of Ravana’s 
return. Tearing up mountains and trees from wherever they could, mighty warriors rushed 
forward gnashing their teeth. (1 — 6) 
The fierce monkeys and terrible bears darted with mountains in their hands, which 
they hurled forth with the utmost fury. The demons, who were unable to resist the 
onslaught, turned and fled. Having thus scattered the enemy ranks, the powerful 
monkeys next closed around Ravana and discomfited him by buffeting him on every side 
and tearing his body with their claws. 
Finding the monkeys most powerful, Ravana took thought. Consequently he 
became invisible and in a moment revealed his illusive power. (100) 




936 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
As he let loose his illusive power terrible beings appeared on the scene — goblins, 




* LANKA-KANDA* 937 

ghosts and ghouls with bows and arrows in their hands. Yoginis holding a sword in one 
hand and a human skull in another, from which they quaffed draughts of fresh blood, 
danced and sang many a song. They uttered horrible cries of “Seize and kill !”, which 
echoed all round. With their mouths wide open they rushed to devour the monkeys, who 
then took to their heels. But whithersoever they turned in their flight they saw a blazing 
fire. The monkeys and bears were thus in a quandary. Then Ravana began raining on 
them a shower of sand. Having thus flabbergasted the monkeys on all sides, the ten- 
headed monster roared again. All the heroes, including Laksmana and Sugriva (the king 
of the monkeys), fainted. The bravest of them wrung their hands, crying “Ah, Rama ! 
Alas, Raghunatha (Lord of the Raghus)!” Having thus crushed the might of all, he wrought 
another delusion. He manifested a host of Hanumans, who rushed forward with rocks in 
their hands and encircled Sri Rama in a dense cordon on every side. With uplifted tails 
and gnashing their teeth they shouted, “Seize and kill him; let him not escape!” Surrounded 
by their tails on every side, the Lord of Kosala shone in their midst. (1 — 8) 
In their midst the King of Kosala with His dark-hued body shone forth as 
resplendent as a lofty Tamala tree encircled by a magnificent hedge of multitudinous 
rainbows. The gods experienced in their heart a mixed feeling of joy and sorrow and 
raised the cries of “Victory ! Victory !! Victory !!!” The Hero of Raghu’s line now flew into 
a rage and with a single arrow instantly dispersed the delusion. The delusion having 
vanished, the monkeys and bears rejoiced and all turned back with trees and rocks in 
their hands. Sri Rama shot forth a volley of arrows, which once more cut off Ravana’s 
arms and heads to the ground. If hundreds of Sesas (serpent-gods), Saradas (goddesses 
of speech), the Vedas and bards were to recite the story of the battle between Sri Rama 
and Ravana and that too for many cycles together, even they would never be able to do 
justice to it. (1-2) 




938 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

The dull-witted Tulasldasa has described only a few salient features of that combat 
just as a fly wings the sky according to its own capacity. The valiant lord of Lanka could 
not be killed even though his heads and arms were cut asanddes many times over. It was 
simply a pastime for the Lord; while the gods, the Siddhas and the sages fidgeted to see 
the Lord struggling (with him). (101 A-B) 

Chapter 185
No sooner were Ravana’s heads cut off than a fresh crop grew like covetousness, 
which increases with every new gain. The enemy could not be killed in spite of the prolonged 
struggle; Sri Rama then looked at Vibhisana. Uma, (continues Lord Siva,) the Lord whose 
will causes the death of Death himself thereby tested the devotion of His servant. “Listen, 
all-wise Ruler of the animate and inanimate creation, Protector of the suppliant, delight of 

LANKA-KANDA* 


939 


the gods and sages : nectar abides in the depth of his navel; by virtue of it, my lord, Ravana 
survives.” The All-merciful rejoiced to hear the words of Vibhisana and took terrible shafts 
in His hands. Many ill-omens manifested themselves at that time. Donkeys, jackals 
and dogs howled in large numbers. Birds too screamed, and thereby portended a world 
calamity: and comets appeared in every quarter of the heavens. There was a preternatural 
and unusual glow in the horizon on all sides and a solar eclipse occurred even without 
the day of the new moon (when the sun and the moon are in conjunction). MandodarT’s 
heart beat wildly and idols shed tears from their eyes. (1 — 5) 

Idols wept, lightning flashed with thunderclap in the air, furious winds blew, the 
earth quaked and the clouds dropped blood, hair and dust; who could recount the great 
ill-omens? The gods in heaven were dismayed at the sight of the boundless portentous 
phenomena and shouted “Victory ! Victory !!” And perceiving the distress of the gods the 
gracious Lord of the Raghus set an arrow to His bow. 
Drawing the bow-string right up to His ear the Lord of the Raghus let fly thirty-one 
shafts, which flew forth like the serpents of Death. (102) 

940 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

One arrow dried up the reservair of nectar in the navel, while the rest struck 
his ten heads and twenty arms with impetuosity. The arrows carried off with them all 
his heads and arms, while the headless and armless trunk danced on the battle-field. 
The earth sunk under the weight of the trunk as it rushed violently on, till the Lord 
struck it with His arrow and split it in two. While dying he shouted with a loud and 
terrible roar: “Where is Rama, that I may challenge and slay him in battle?” The earth 
reeled as the ten-headed monster fell; the ocean, the rivers, the elephants guarding 
the quarters, and the mountains were shaken. Enloging the two halves he dropped to 
the ground, crushing under their weight a host of bears and monkeys. After depositing 
the arms and heads before Mandodari, the darts returned to the Lord of the universe 
and all found their way back into the quiver. Seeing this, the gods sounded their kettle- 
drums. His soul entered the Lord’s mouth in the form of effulgence. Lord Sambhu and 
the four-faced Brahma (the Creator) rejoiced to see the spectacle. The whole universe 
resounded with cries of “Victory ! Victory !! Glory to the Hero of Raghu’s line, mighty 
of arm !!!” Gods and sages rained down flowers, shouting “Glory, glory to the 
All-merciful ! Glory to Mukunda (the Bestower of liberation) !!” (1 — 6) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 941 
 “Glory to You, O Mukunda (the Bestower of liberation), the fountain of mercy, the 
dispeller of all fear of pairs of opposites, the delight of those who take refuge in You, the 
torment of the ranks of the wicked, the Prime Cause, the ever compassionate and omnipresent 
Ruler of all.” Full of joy, the gods rained down flowers; their kettle-drums sounded with a 
crash. On the battle-field Sri Rama’s limbs displayed the beauty of a number of Cupids. 
The crown of matted hair on His head, interspersed with most beautiful flowers, gleamed 
like flashes of lightning on the star-lit peak of a dark mountain. As He stood turning His 
bow and arrow between His arms, specks of blood adorned His person, like a swarm of 
Raimuni* birds perched on a Tamala tree absorbed in their delight. (1 -2) 
With a shower of His gracious glances the Lord dispelled the fears of the gods; 
and the bears and monkeys all shouted in their joy : “Glory to Mukunda, the abode of 
Bliss!” (103) 

* A tiny bird deep red in colour. 
942 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

The moment Mandodari (Ravana’s principal spouse) saw her lord’s heads she 
fainted in her grief and dropped to the ground. His other wives too sprang up and rushed 
to the spot weeping; lifting up and supporting Mandodari they all arrived where Ravana’s 
remains lay. Seeing their lord’s condition they set up a shriek; their hair flew loose and 
they became oblivious of their body. Wildly beating their bosom and weeping, they 
recounted his glory. “At your might, my Lord, the earth ever shook; fire, the moon and 
the sun stood obscure before your splendour. Even Sesa (the serpent-god) and the 
divine Tortoise could not bear the weight of your body, which is now lying on the ground 
soiled with dust. Varuna (the god presiding over the waters), Kubera (the god of riches), 
Indra (the lord of the celestials) and the wind-god — none of these ever had the courage 
to confront you in battle. By the might of your arm, my lord, you conquered Death as well 
as Yama (the god who punishes evil-doers in the other world); yet you lie today like a 
forlorn creature. Your greatness is known all the world over; even your sons and 
kinsmen possessed untold strength. Hostility with Rama has, however, reduced you to 
such a plight : not one of your stock is left to lament over your death. The whole of God’s 
creation, my lord, was under your control; the frightened regents of the eight quarters 
ever bowed their heads to you. But now jackals feast on your heads and arms, a fate 
in no way undeserved by an enemy of Sri Rama. Doomed to death, my lord, you heeded 
not my words, and took the Ruler of all animate and inanimate beings for an ordinary 
mortal. (1 — 7) 
 “You took for a mere man Sri Hari Himself, a veritable fire to consume the forest 
of the demon race, and did not adore the All-merciful, to whom, my beloved spouse, Lord 
Siva, Brahma (the Creator) and other gods pay homage. This body of yours had taken 
delight from its very birth in harming others and was a sink of multitudinous sins; yet Sri 
Rama has absorbed you in His own being ! I bow to Him, the immutable Brahma. 




* LANKA-KANDA* 

 “Ah, my lord ! there is none else so gracious as the divine Sri Rama (the Lord 
of the Raghus), who bestowed on you a state which is difficult even for the Yogis to 

The gods, sages and Siddhas, all rejoiced to hear Mandodari’s words. Brahma, the 
great Lord Siva, Narada, Sanaka and his three brothers (Sanandana, Sanatana and 
Sanatkumara) and all other great sages who taught the highest truth (the identity of the 
individual soul with the supreme Spirit) were all overwhelmed with emotion as they 
feasted their eyes on the Lord of the Raghus, and felt supremely gratified. Seeing all the 
women making lamentation Vibhisana approached them with a very heavy heart and was 
grieved to see his Brother’s condition. The Lord thereupon gave an order to His younger 
brother, Laksmana, who consoled him in many ways. Then Vibhisana returned to his 
lord, who looked upon him with an eye of compassion and said, “Abandon all sorrow and 
perform the funeral rites.” In obedience to the Lord’s command he performe the 
obsequies, strictly observing the scriptural ordinance and with due regard to time and 

944 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


After offering to the deceased handfuls of water and sesamum seeds (for the propitiation 
of his soul) Mandodari and all the other queens returned to their palace, recounting to 
themselves the host of excellences of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). (1 05) 
 (After finishing the obsequies) Vibhisana came and bowed his head once more. 
The All-merciful then called His younger brother. “Do you and Sugriva (the lord of the 
monkeys) as well as Arigada, Nala and Nila with Jambavan and Hanuman (the son of 
the wind-god), sagacious as you are, all of you accompany Vibhisana and make 
arrangements for his coronation,” said the Lord of the Raghus. “In deference to my 
father’s command I may not enter a town, but send the monkeys and my younger 
brother, who are as good as myself.” On hearing the Lord’s command the monkeys 
proceeded at once and arriving in the town made preparations for the installation. With 
due reverence they seated him on the throne and applying a sacred mark on his 
forehead as a token of sovereignty) they glorified him. Nay, joining their palms, they all 
bowed their head to him; and then with Vibhisana they returned to the Lord. The Hero 
of Raghu’s line next called the monkeys together and gratified them all by addressing 
kind words to them. (1 — 4) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 945 

The Lord cheered them by speaking to them words sweet as nectar : “It is by your 
might that the enemy has been killed and Vibhisana has got the kingdom (of Lanka); 
while your glory will remain ever fresh in all the three spheres. Men who sing your 
blessed glory alongwith Mine shall easily cross the boundless ocean of mundane 
existence.” 

The monkey host would never feel sated with listening to the Lord’s words. They 
all bowed their head and clasped His lotus feet again and again. (106) 
The Lord then called Hanuman. “Go to Lanka”, said the Almighty, “and telling Janaka’s 
Daughter all that has happened return with the news of her welfare.” Thereupon Hanuman 
entered the city and on hearing of his arrival demons and demonesses ran to meet him. 
They paid him all kinds of homage and thereafter conducted him into the presence of Janaka’s 
Daughter. Hanuman made obeisance to Her from a respectable distance, and Janaka’s 
Daughter recognized him as Sri Rama’s own messenger. “Tell me, dear son, if my gracious 
lord is doing well with His younger brother and the monkey host.” “All is well with the Lord 
of Kosala. Mother, the ten-headed monster has been conquered in battle, while Vibhisana 
has attained everlasting dominion (that will endure till the end of this Kalpa).” Her heart 
was filled with joy when She heard the monkey’s words. (1 — 4) 
946 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Her soul was overjoyed, a thrill ran through Her body and with eyes full of tears 
Rama (Sita) said again and again. “What can I give you? There is nothing in all the three 
worlds equal in value to this information.” “Listen, mother: today I have doubtless attained 
the sovereignty of the entire creation when I find Sri Rama safe and sound with His 
brother after conquering the enemy’s ranks on the battlefield.” 

 “Listen, Hanuman, my son : may all commendable virtues abide in your heart and 
may the Lord of Kosala with Ananta (Laksmana) be ever gracious to you.” (107) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 947 

 “Now, my dear son, devise some means whereby I may behold with my own eyes 
the tender swarthy limbs of my Lord.” Then Hanuman returned to Sri Rama and apprised 
Him of Sita’s welfare. On hearing Her tidings the Ornament of the solar race called 
Prince Arigada and Vibhisana. “Both of you accompany the son of the wind-god and 
respectfully escort Janaka’s Daughter here.” Forthwith all went to the place where Sita 
was and found a whole host of demonesses waiting on Her in all humility. Vibhisana gave 
prompt instructions to the demonesses, who washed Her body in all possible ways. 
They also decked Her with ornaments of every description and then brought a beautiful 
palanquin duly equipped. Videha’s Daughter gladly mounted it with Her thoughts fixed on 
the all-blissful Rama, Her loving lord. Guards marched on all four sides, staves in hand; 
they were all supremely delighted at heart. The bears and monkeys all came to have a 
look at Her; but the guards darted in a fury to keep them back. Said the Hero of Raghu’s 
line, “Follow my advice, Vibhisana and bring Sita on foot.” “Let the monkeys gaze on Her 
as they would on their own mother,” smilingly added the Almighty Lord of the Raghus. 
The bears and monkeys rejoiced to hear the Lord’s words, while from the heavens the 
gods rained down flowers in profusion. Sita (it will be remembered) had been previously 
lodged in fire (vide Aranyakanda XXIII. 1-2); Sri Rama (the inner Witness of all) now 
sought to bring Her back to light. (1 — 7) 
It was for this reason that the All-merciful addressed some reproachful words to 
Her. On hearing them the demon ladies (who had accompanied Her) all began to 
lament. (108) 

948 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 186

Sita, however, bowed to the Lord’s command — pure as She was in thought, word 
and deed — and said, “Laksmana, help me as a priest in the performance of this sacred 
rite and quickly kindle me a fire.” When Laksmana heard Sita’s words, full of anguish 
caused by separation (from Her Lord) and imbued with critical insight, piety and 
prudence, tears rushed to his eyes and he joined his palms in prayer; but he too could 
not speak a word to the Lord. Reading Sri Rama’s tacit approval in His looks, however, 
Laksmana ran and after kindling a fire brought plenty of firewood. Videha’s Daughter 
rejoiced at heart to perceive the blazing fire and did not flinch at all. “If in thought, word 
and deed I have never set my heart on anyone other than the Hero of Raghu’s line, 
may this fire, which knows the working of all minds, become cool like sandal-paste to 
me.” (1 — 4) 
With Her thoughts fixed on the Lord, the Princess of Mithila entered the flames as 
though they were cool like sandal-paste, crying “Glory to the Lord of Kosala, whose feet 
are adored by the great Lord Siva with the purest devotion !” Both Her shadow-form as 
well as the social stigma (occasioned by Her forced residence at Ravana’s) were consumed 

in the blazing fire; but no one could know the secret of the Lord’s doings. Even the gods, 
Siddhas and sages stood gazing in the air. Fire assumed a bodily form and, taking by the 
hand the real §ri (Sita), celebrated alike in the Vedas and the world, escorted and 
presented Her to Sri Rama even as the Ocean of milk presented Goddess Indira (Laksmi) 
to Lord Visnu. Standing on the left side of Sri Rama, She shone resplendent in Her 
exquisite beauty like the bud of a gold lily beside a fresh blue lotus. (1-2) 


The gods in their delight rained down flowers and kettledrums sounded in the air. 
The Kinnaras sang their melodies and the celestial nymphs danced, all mounted on their 
aerial cars. The beauty of the Lord reunited with Janaka’s Daughter was beyond all 
measure and bound. The bears and monkeys rejoiced at the sight and shouted “Glory 
to the Lord of the Raghus, the essence of bliss.” (109 A-B) 

950 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 187
Then, with the permission of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus); Matali (Indra’s 
charioteer) left (for his abode in heaven) after bowing his head at the Lord’s feet. Now 
came the gods, ever alive to their own selfish interests, and spoke words as though they 
were seekers of the highest truth : “Friend of the meek, gracious, and divine Lord of the 
Raghus, you have shown mercy to the gods. This sensual wretch, who took delight in 
doing mischief to the whole world and trod the evil way, has perished through his own 
sins. You are alike to all, the imperishable Brahma, ever unchangeable, impartial by 
nature, integral, devoid of material properties, unborn, sinless, immutable, invincible, 
unfailing in power, and full of compassion. It was You who assumed the form of a fish, 
a tortoise; a boar, a man-lion and a dwarf as well as that of Parasurama. Whenever, O 
Lord, the gods have been in trouble, You have put an end to it by appearing in one form 
or other. This impure wretch, a perpetual enemy of the gods, was given up to lust, greed 
and vanity, and very passionate too. That even this vilest creature attained Your state 
is a marvel to us. We gods are supremely qualified (for the highest state): yet, devoted 
as we are to our own selfish ends, we have forgotten the worship of our lord and are 
ever involved in the flood of birth and death. Now redeem us, O Lord, since we have 
sought shelter in You.” (1 — 6) 


Having thus made their supplication, the gods and Siddhas all remained standing 
where they were with joined palms. Then, thrilling all over with excess of love, Brahma 
(the Creator) commenced his prayer. (110) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 951 
 “Glory to You, O Rama, perpetual abode of bliss. O Hari (the reliever of suffering), 
O Chief of the Raghus, bearing a bow and arrows! Lord, You are a veritable lion to 
tear in pieces the elephant of mundane existence, and an ocean of virtues, my clever 
and omnipresent Master. In Your person stands concentrated the incomparable beauty 
952 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
of a myriad Cupids; Siddhas, as well as the greatest of sages and bards sing Your 
praises. Your glory is not only sacred, it purifies all; in Your wrath You seized Ravana 
even as Garuda (the king of the birds) might seize a huge serpent. Delight of devotees, 
and dispeller of their grief and fear, You are ever unmoved by passion, and are all- 
intelligence, my lord. Your descent on the mortal plane is beneficent and full of untold 
virtues: You come to relieve Earth’s burdens and Your manifestations on earth are 
wisdom personified. (Though descended on earth,) You are ever unborn, omnipresent, 
one (without a second) and beginningless. I gladly bow to You, O Rama, fountain of 
mercy ! Ornament of Raghu’s race and Slayer of demon Dusana (Ravana’s Cousin), 
You eradicate the faults of Your devotees and made Vibhisana, destitute as he was, 
the Ruler of Lanka. Storehouse of virtue and wisdom and beyond all measure, You have 
no pride in You and are unborn, all pervading and free from the taint of Maya; I constantly 
adore You, Rama. Terrible is the glory and might of Your arms, which are deft in 
exterminating the hordes of the impious. Compassionate and friendly to the poor without 
any ostensible reason and a reservoir of beauty, I adore You alongwith Rama (Sita). 
Deliverer from the rounds of birth and death, You are beyond both cause (Prakrti) and 
effect (the phenomenal universe) and eradicate the awful weaknesses of the (devotee’s) 
mind. Armed with a charming bow, arrows, and quiver, You have eyes resembling a 
red lotus. A paragon of kings, home of bliss, Laksmi’s lovely Consort, subduer of 
arrogance, lust and the false sense of mineness, You are free from blemish integral and 
imperceptible to the senses. Though manifest in all forms, You never transmuted 
Yourself into them all: so declare the Vedas; it is no mere gossip, as will be clear from 
the analogy of the sun and the sunshine, which are different and yet identical. Blessed 
are all these monkeys, O ubiquitous Lord, who reverently gaze on Your countenance; 
while accursed, O Hari, is our (so-called) immortal existence and our ethereal bodies 
in that we lack in devotion to You and are lost in worldly pleasures. Now show Your 
mercy to me, compassionate as You are to the afflicted, and take away my differentiating 
sense (which makes the world appear as apart from You), which leads me to wrong 
action and deluded by which I pass my days in merriment, mistaking woe for happiness. 
Destroyer of the wicked and lovely jewel of the earth, Your lotus feet are adored even 
by Sambhu (Lord Siva) and Uma (Goddess ParvatT). O King of kings, grant me this 
boon that I may cherish loving devotion to Your lotus feet, which is a perennial source 
of blessings.” (1 — 11) 

As the four-faced Brahma thus prayed, his body was entrenly thrilled with emotion. 
And his eyes knew no satiation as they gazed on the Ocean of beauty. (Ill) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 953 
That very moment King Dasaratha appeared on the scene (in his celestial form); 
his eyes were flooded with tears as he beheld his son (Sri Rama). The Lord and His 
younger brother (Laksmana) made obeisance and the father in his turn gave them his 
blessing. “Dear father, it was all due to your religious merit that I conquered the invincible 
demon king.” Dasaratha was overwhelmed with emotion when he heard his son’s words; 
tears rushed to his eyes again and the hair on his body stood erect. The Lord of the 
Raghus understood that His father bore the same affection for Him as he did before; He, 
therefore, looked at His father and bestowed on him solid wisdom. Uma, (continues Lord 
Siva,) Dasaratha did not attain final beatitude for this simple reason that he set his heart 
on Devotion while maintaining his separate identity. Worshippers of God in His embodied 
form spurn final beatitude: to them Sri Rama vouchsafes devotion to His own person. 
Having prostrated himself before the Lord again and again, Dasaratha joyfully returned 
to his abode in heaven. (1 — 4) 
Perceiving the Almighty Lord of Kosala safe and sound with His younger brother 
(Laksmana) and Janaka’s Daughter, and beholding their beauty, Indra (the Lord of the 
celestials) began extolling Him with a cheerful heart: — (112) 
954 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 188
Glory to Sri Rama, beauty personified, the bestower of peace on the suppliant, 
equipped with an excellent bow, arrows and quiver and triumphing in His mighty strength 
of arm. Glory to the Slayer of Dusana and Khara and the crusher of the demon hordes! 
Now that You have disposed of this wretch, my lord, all the gods enjoy full security. 
Glory to the Reliever of Earth’s burden, whose greatness is beneficent and unbounded. 
Glory to the All-merciful Slayer of Ravana, who reduced the demon host to a miserable 
plight. Outrageous was the pride of Ravana (the lord of Lanka), who had subdued even 
gods and Gandharvas (the celestial musicians). Nay, he relentlessly pursued sages, the 
Siddhas, human beings, birds and Nagas alike. He took delight in injuring others and was 
most wicked; the vile sinner has now reaped the fruit of his misdeeds. Now listen, my 
lord, possessed of eyes as large as the lotus and compassionate to the humble: my 

* LANKA-KANDA* 955 

pride was inordinate; I accounted no one as equal to me. At the sight of Your lotus feet, 
however, my pride, which entailed much woe, has taken leave of me. Some people 
meditate on the attributeless Brahma (the Absolute), whom the Vedas declare as 
unmanifest. What attracts my mind, however, is the Supreme embodied as Sri Rama, 
King of Kosala. Together with Videha’s Daughter and Your younger brother (Laksmana), 
therefore, pray abide in my heart; and recognizing me as Your own servant, bless me 
with devotion, O Abode of Rama (Laksmi). (1 — 8) 
 “Grant me devotion to Your feet, O Abode of Rama, dispeller of fear and solace 
of the suppliant. I adore You, O blissful Rama, the Lord of the Raghus, possessing the 
beauty of a myriad Cupids. Delight of the hosts of heaven, Queller of contrary 
experiences (like joy and sorrow etc.), appearing in a human form possessing incomparable 
strength, worthy of adoration even to Brahma (the creator) and Sankara, O Rama, I bow 
to You, tender as You are through compassion.” 
 “Now cast Your gracious look on me, O merciful Lord, and command me what to 
do.” Hearing these polite words, Sri Rama, who is noted for His compassion to the meek, 
enjoined him as follows: — (113) 
956 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “Listen, King of the gods: our monkeys and bears, those that were killed by the 
demons, are lying on the ground. They have laid down their lives in my service: 
therefore, restore them all to life, O wise lord of the celestials.” Listen, O king of the birds: 
(continues Kakabhusundi,) these words of the Lord are profoundly mysterious; only 
enlightened sages can apprehend them. The Lord Himself can wipe out the inhabitants 
of the three spheres and bring them back to life; He wished only to give Indra honour. 
By a shower of nectar the latter restored the monkeys and bears to life. They all arose 
with delight and betook themselves to the Lord. Although the shower of nectar 
promiscuously fell on the dead of both the armies, it is the bears and monkeys alone that 
returned to life, but not the demons. Their mind was absorbed in the thought of Sri Rama 
when they gave up the ghost; that is why they got liberated and were rid of the bonds 
of mundane existence. As for the monkeys and bears, they were all part manifestations 
of the gods (who are all immortal): hence they all came to life by the will of Sri Rama (the 
Lord of the Raghus). Is there anyone so kind to the afflicted as Sri Rama, who liberated 
the whole demon host? Even the wicked Ravana, who was a sink of impurities and given 
up to sensuality, attained to an exalted state which is withheld even from the greatest 
of sages. (1 — 5) 
Chapter 188
After raining down flowers the gods mounted each his own shining aerial car and 
departed. Finding it a welcome opportunity the all-wise Sambhu (Lord Siva) arrived in the 
presence of the Lord. Most lovingly, with joined palms, His lotus eyes full of tears and 
the hair on His body standing erect, the Slayer of the demon Tripura made the following 
supplication with choked voice : — (114 A-B) 

* LANKA-KANDA* 957 
 “Save me, Chief of Raghu’s line, bearing an excellent bow and shining arrows in Your 
hands. A furious wind to disperse the mass of clouds in the form of colossal ignorance, a fire 
to consume the forest of doubts, and delight of the gods, You are both with and without 
attributes, a shrine of virtues and most lovely to look at; nay, You are a burning midday Sun 
to scatter the darkness of delusion. A veritable lion to kill the elephants of lust, anger and 
pride, pray, constantly abide in the forest of the devotee’s mind. A severe frost to blast the 
lotus bed of sensual desires, You are generous beyond conception. Nay, playing the role of 
Mount Mandara for churning the ocean of mundane existence, kindly stave off my fear (of 
birth and death) and transport me across the stormy ocean of mundane existence. Possessed 
of a swarthy form with lotus eyes, befriender of the meek, reliever of the suppliant’s agony, 
take up Your abode in my heart for ever, O King Rama, with Your younger brother 
(Laksmana) and Janaka’s Daughter, O Delight of the sages, Jewel of the terrestrial globe, 
lord of Tulasidasa and destroyer of fear. (1 — 5) 
 “When, my lord, Your Coronation takes place at Kosalapura (Ayodhya), I will come 
to witness Your benevolent role, O Ocean of Mercy! (115) 
958 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 189
When Sambhu (Lord Siva) had finished His prayer and left, Vibhisana then came 
to the Lord. Bowing his head at the latter’s feet, he submitted in gentle terms: “Listen to 
my prayer, O Lord wielding the Sarriga bow. My lord, You have killed Ravana with all his 
kinsfolk and army and spread Your sacred renown throughout the three spheres. And 
above all You have shown mercy in every way to me, humble, impure, low-born and 
mean-minded as I am. Now, my lord, sanctity Your servant’s abode (by Your holy 
presence), bathe Yourself and beguile the exertion of the battle. Then inspect the treasury, 
palaces and wealth and gladly bestow, my gracious lord, whatever You please on the 
monkeys. Pray, accept me as Your own in every way, my lord, and then proceed to 
Ayodhya taking me alongwith you”. Even as the Lord, who is so compassionate to the 
meek, heard these polite words, His large eyes filled with tears. (1 — 4) 
 “Listen, brother: what you say is quite true: your treasury and palaces are all My 
own. But, when I recollect Bharata’s condition, every moment that passes seems an age 
to Me. Clad in the robes of a hermit, with wasted body he constantly repeats My name. 
Therefore, take steps, My friend, I beseech you, that I may soon be able to see him 
again. If, on the other hand, I reach there on the expiry of the term of My exile, I do not 
expect to find My brother alive.” And even as the Lord recalled His brother’s affection He 
felt a thrill all over His body again and again. “As for yourself, you shall enjoy sovereignty 
till the end of creation, inwardly thinking of Me all the time; and then you shall ascend to 
My abode, the destination of all holy men.” (116 A — D) 
Chapter 190
Delighted to hear Sri Rama’s words, Vibhisana clasped the feet of the All-merciful. 
The monkeys and bears too all rejoiced and, clasping the Lord’s feet, began to recount 
His sacred virtues. Then Vibhisana withdrew to his palace and had his celebrated aerial 
car loaded with precious stones and articles of dress. He then brought the aerial car, 
Puspaka as it was called, and set it before the Lord; and the All-merciful thereupon 
smilingly said, “Listen, my friend, Vibhisana; step into the aerial car and rising into the air, 
scramble the clothes and ornaments.” Vibhisana immediately rose into the air and 
dropped down all the jewels and raiment. The monkeys picked up whatever each took 
a fancy to; they put precious stones into their mouth (thinking them to be some edible 
substance) but would throw them away (the moment they realized their mistake). Sri 
Rama as well as Sri (Sita) and His younger brother (Laksmana) felt amused at the sight, 
exceedingly playful as the All-merciful is. (1 — 4) 
960 
Chapter 191

SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
That Ocean of compassion, whom sages are unable to catch even in meditation 
and whom the Vedas describe only in negative terms such as “Not that, not that,” 
amused himself with the monkeys in diverse ways. Uma, (continues Lord Siva,) practice 
of Yoga (concentration of mind), Japa (muttering of prayers), charity and penance, 
performance of sacrifices, fasting and other religious observances fail to evoke Sri 
Rama’s 
Having thus secured raiment and jewels, the bears and monkeys adorned their 
person with the same and appeared before the Lord of the Raghus. The Lord of Kosala 
laughed again and again to see all the monkeys, a motley host indeed. The Lord of the 
Raghus showered His grace on all by casting a look at them, and spoke to them in 
endearing terms: “It was through your might that I succeeded first in killing Ravana and 
then in crowning Vibhisana. Now return all of you to your several homes; keep your 
thought fixed on Me and fear none.” The monkeys were all overcome with affection to 
hear these words and reverently replied with joined palms: O Lord, whatever You say 
well becomes of You. But we get mystified on hearing Your words. You are the 
Sovereign of all the three spheres, O Lord of the Raghus; knowing our humble state You 
took us under Your protection. But we are overwhelmed with shame to hear such words 
from the lips of our Master (Yourself). Can a swarm of mosquitoes ever help Garuda 
* LANKA-KANDA* 961 
Chapter 192
(the king of the birds)?” The bears and monkeys were overpowered with emotion when 
they saw what was in the mind of the Lord, (viz., His reluctance to take them to 
Ayodhya); they had no inclination to return home. (1 — 5) 
But in obedience to the Lord’s command the monkeys and bears all dispersed with 
a mixed feeling of joy and sorrow and with many a humble submission, enshrining Sri 
Rama’s image in their heart. The monkey-king (Sugriva), Nila, Jambavan (the lord of the 
bears), Arigada, Nala, Hanuman and all the other mighty generals of the monkey host, 
together with Vibhisana, were too overwhelmed with emotion to utter a word. With eyes 
full of tears they stood facing Sri Rama and gazing intently on Him. (118 A — C) 

962 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 193
Perceiving their excessive love the Lord of the Raghus (mounted the aerial car 
alongwith Slta and Laksmana and) took them all up into the car. He mentally bowed 
His head at the feet of the Brahmanas and directed the car to move towards the north. 
An uproarious noise burst forth as the car took off, all shouting “Glory to the Hero 
of Raghu’s line !” The car was provided with a lofty and charming throne; the Lord 
took His seat on it alongwith Sri (Sita). Accompanied by His Spouse, Sri Rama shone 
forth like a cloud with lightning on a peak of Mount Meru. The splendid car moved 
with all speed on its way, to the joy of the gods, who rained down flowers on it. A 
most delightful cool breeze breathed soft and fragrant; the water of the ocean, lakes 
and streams became transparent and auspicious omens occurred on all sides. Nay, 
everyone felt cheerful at heart; the whole expanse of the sky including the four quarters 
was clear. Said the Hero of Raghu’s line: “Mark, Sita: it was on this spot that Laksmana 
slew Meghanada (the Crown Prince of Lanka). Here lie on the battlefield mighty demons 
killed by Hanuman and Arigada. And here fell the two brothers, Kumbhakarna and 
Ravana, the torment of gods and sages.” (1 — 6) 

Chapter 194
 “It was here that I had a bridge constructed and also installed a symbol of the 
blissful Lord Siva.” So saying, the All-merciful Sri Rama and Sita both made obeisance 
to Sambhu. Every spot in the woods, where the Ocean of compassion had either taken 
up His abode or rested awhile, was then pointed out by the Lord to Janaka’s Daughter 
and mentioned by name. (119 A-B) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 963 
Forthwith the aerial car reached the most charming Dandaka forest, the abode of 
many a great sage like Kumbhaja (the jar-born Agastya) and others: Sri Rama visited the 

hermitages of all. After receiving the blessings of all these sages the Lord of the universe arrived at Citrakuta; and, having gratified the sages there, the aerial car departed thence 
with all speed. Sri Rama next pointed out to Janaka’s Daughter the beautiful Yamuna, 
that washes away the impurities of the Kali age. Thereafter they espied the holy Gariga 
(the celestial stream) and Sri Rama said, “Sita, make obeisance. Now have a look at 
Prayaga, the king of all sacred places, whose very sight drives away sins committed 
through a myriad lives. Again look at the most holy Triveni (the confluence of the Gariga, 
Yamuna and the subterranean Sarasvati), the dispeller of grief and a ladder to Sri Hari’s 
Abode. Now see the most sacred city of Ayodhya, that relieves the threefold agony and 
uproots the malady of transmigration.” (1 — 5) 
The gracious Rama and Sita both made obeisance to Ayodhya. Tears rushed to 
His eyes, every hair on His body stood erect and the Lord felt delighted again and again. 
The Lord then landed at the Triveni and with much joy bathed in the confluence. He bestowed 
a variety of gifts on the Brahmanas and the monkeys too joined Him. (120 A-B) 

964 

Chapter 195
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The Lord instructed Hanuman as follows: — “Go ahead of us to the city of Ayodhya 
in the guise of a religious student, tell Bharata the news of our welfare and then come 
back with all the news about him.” The son of the wind-god immediately left and the 
Lord then called on Bharadvaja. The sage offered Him all kinds of worship and after 
hymning His praises further gave Him his blessing. The Lord in His turn adored the 
sage’s feet with joined palms, mounted the car and went on His journey. At this end 
the Nisada chief heard that the Lord had come and exclaiming “The boat, where is 
the boat ?” summoned his people. Meanwhile the aerial car flew across the celestial 
stream and landed on the bank (adjoining Srhgaverapura) in obedience to the Lord’s 
command. Then Sita offered all kinds of worship to the celestial stream and threw 
Herself at the feet of the Goddess presiding over the stream. In gladness of soul Gariga 
pronounced Her blessing. “May You enjoy a happy married life without a break, O 
fair lady.” Overwhelmed with love, Guha ran to meet the Lord as soon as he heard 
of His landing and approached his Master, full of ecstatic joy. Perceiving the Lord 
accompanied by Videha’s Daughter, he fell flat on the ground oblivious of his own 
existence. The Lord of the Raghus felt overjoyed to see his excessive fondness; He 
took and clasped him to His bosom. (1 — 6) 
* LANKA-KANDA* 


965 
Chapter 196

The All-merciful Lord of Rama (Sita or Laksmi), the wisest among the wise, took and 
clasped him to His bosom and, seating him very close to Him, enquired after his welfare. 
Guha submitted in reply: “Now all is well with me; for I have beheld Your lotus-feet, worthy 
of adoration even to Viranci (Brahma) and Lord Sankara. O blissful Rama, self-sufficient as 
You are, I simply adore You; O Rama, I adore You.” That Nisada, who was low in every 
respect, Sri Hari clasped to His bosom as though he were Bharata himself ! A victim of 
infatuation, this dull-witted Tulasidasa, however, has cast out of his mind even such a 
benign lord. This story of the Slayer of Ravana, is not only sanctifying but vouchsafes 
loving and perpetual devotion to Sri Rama’s feet. Nay, it uproots lust and other evil passions 
and begets true wisdom and is gladly sung by gods, the Siddhas and sages. (1-2) 
Chapter 197
The Lord rewards with everlasting victory, wisdom and worldly prosperity those 
men of good understanding who listen to the stories relating to the victory of Sri Rama 
(the Hero of Raghu’s line) in battle. Ponder well and see for yourself, O my mind: this 
age of Kali is the very home of impurities. There is nothing to fall back upon in this age, 
other than the name of the illustrious Lord of the Raghus. (121 A-B) 
Thus ends the sixth descent into the Manasa lake of Sri Rama’s exploits, that 
eradicates all the impurities of the Kali age. 

