
Guru-Vandana 

Sri Ramacaritamanasa 


(The Manasa lake containing the exploits of Sri Rama) 

Descent Seven 

(Uttara-Kanda) 
Chapter 198
I unceasingly extol Sri Rama, the praiseworthy lord of Sita (Janaka’s Daughter), 
the chief of Raghu’s line, possessed of a form greenish blue as the neck of a peacock 
and adorned with a print of the Brahmana’s lotus-foot — which testifies to His being the 
greatest of all gods — rich in splendour, clad in yellow robes, lotus-eyed, ever-propitious, 
holding a bow and arrow in His hands, mounted on the aerial car named Puspaka, 
accompanied by a host of monkeys and waited upon by His own brother (Laksmana). (1) 
The lotus-feet of Sri Rama (the Lord of Kosala), charming and delicate, are adored 
by Brahma (the Unborn) and the greatest Lord Siva and fondled by the lotus hands of 
Janaka’s Daughter and are the haunt of the bee-like mind of the worshipper. (2) 

968 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
I glorify the All-merciful Lord Sankara, possessing a comely form, white as the 
jasmine flower, the moon and the conch, with eyes resembling a lovely lotus, Ambika’s 
(Mother Parvati’s) Spouse, the bestower of one’s desired fruit and the deliverer from the 
clutches of carnality. (3) 

Chapter 199
The term of Sri Rama’s exile was to expire only the next day, which made the people 
of the city extremely anxious. Wasted in body through separation from Sri Rama, men and 
women alike were plunged in thought everywhere. Meanwhile auspicious omens of all 
kinds occurred and everyone felt cheerful at heart. The city itself brightened up all round, 
as if to announce the Lord’s advent. Kausalya and the other mothers all felt inwardly happy 
as if someone was about to tell them that the Lord had come with Sita and Laksmana. 
Bharata’s right eye and arm throbbed again and again. Recognizing this to be a lucky 
omen, he felt overjoyed at heart; but the very next moment he became thoughtful again. 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 


969 

The term of Sri Rama’s exile, which was the sole hope of his life, was going to expire 
only a day hence: the thought filled Bharata’s mind with untold grief. “How is it that the Lord 
did not turn up? Has He cast me out of His mind, knowing me to be crooked? Ah I How 
blessed and fortunate is Laksmana, who is truly devoted to Sri Rama’s lotus-feet. The Lord 
knew me to be false and perverse; that is why He refused to take me alongwith Him. If the 
Lord were to consider my doings, there would be no redemption for me even after countless 
cycles. But the Lord never takes into account the faults of His devotees, being a friend of 
the humble and most tender-hearted. I have a firm conviction in my heart that Sri Rama will 
surely meet me; for the omens are so propitious. But, if I outlive the expiry of the time-limit, 
no one would be so despicable in this world as I.” (1 — 4) 

While Bharata’s mind was thus sinking in the ocean of separation from Sri Rama, 
the son of the wind-god, disguised as a Brahmana, came like a bark to his rescue. He 
found Bharata seated on a mat of Kusa grass, emaciated in body, with a coil of matted 
hair for a crown and the words, “Rama, Rama, Raghupati” on his lips, his lotus eyes 
streaming with tears. (1 A-B) 
970 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

At this sight Hanuman was over-joyed; every hair on his body stood erect and his 
eyes rained copiously. He felt gratified at heart in everyway and addressed Bharata in 
words that were as nectar to his ears: “He, in whose absence you sorrow day and night, 
the catalogue of whose virtues you are incessantly recounting the glory of Raghu’s line, 
the delight of the virtuous and the deliverer of gods and sages, has safely arrived. Having 
conquered His foe in battle, with the gods to hymn His praises, the Lord is now on His 
way with Sita and Laksmana.” The moment Bharata heard these words he forgot all his 
woes, like a thirsty man who has secured nectar. “Who are you, my beloved friend, and 
whence have you come? You have told me a most pleasing news.” “ Listen, O fountain 
of mercy: I am the son of the wind-god, a monkey; Hanuman is my name. I am a humble 
servant of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), the befriender of the meek.” Hearing this, 
Bharata rose and reverently embraced him. The affection with which he embraced him 
was too great for his heart to contain; his eyes streamed with tears and every hair on 
his body stood erect. “At your very sight, O Hanuman, all my woes have disappeared. 
In you I have embraced today my beloved Rama Himself.” Again and again he enquired 
after Sri Rama’s health and said, “Listen, brother; what shall I give you (in return for this 
happy news)? I have pondered and found that there is nothing in this world to match the 
news you have brought. I am thus unable to repay my debt to you. Now, pray, recount 
to me the doings of my lord.” Then Hanuman bowed his head at Bharata’s feet and 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 971 

narrated all the meritorious deeds of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). “Tell me, 
Hanuman, does my gracious lord ever remember me as one of His servants?” (1 — 8) 
“Did the Jewel of Raghu’s line ever remember me as His servant ?” Hanuman 
was thrilled with joy to hear this over-modest question of Bharata and fell at the latter’s 
feet, saying to himself, “How can he be otherwise than humble, the holiest of the holy 
and an ocean of noble virtues, whose praises Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line), the 
lord of the animate and inanimate creation, recites with His own lips?” 
 “To Rama you are dear as life, my lord: take my words to be true, dear brother.” 
Hearing this, Bharata embraced Hanuman again and again with a joy which could not be 
contained in his heart. Bowing his head at Bharata’s feet, Hanuman forth with returned 
to Sri Rama and drawing close to Him told Him that all was well. The Lord then mounted 
His aerial car and joyfully proceeded (towards His destination). ( 2 A-B) 

972 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 200
Bharata too returned with joy to Ayodhya and broke all the news to his preceptor 
(the sage Vasistha). He then made it known inside the palace that the Lord of the 
Raghus was approaching Ayodhya safe and sound. On hearing the news all the mothers 
started up and ran; but Bharata eased their mind by personally telling them of the Lord’s 
welfare. When the information reached the citizens, men and women all ran out in their 
joy (to meet their lord). With gold plates containing curds, Durva grass, the sacred yellow 
pigment known by the name of Gorocana, fruits and flowers and young leaves of the 
sacred Tulasi (basil) plant, the root of all blessings, ladies sallied forth with the stately 
gait of an elephant, singing as they went. All ran out just as they happened to be and 
did not take children or old folk with them. People asked one another: “Brother, did you 
see the gracious Lord of the Raghus?” Having come to know of the Lord’s advent, the 
city of Ayodhya became a mine of all beauty. A delightful breeze breathed soft, cool and 
fragrant. The Sarayu rolled down crystal clear water. (1 — 5) 
Accompanied by his preceptor (the sage Vasistha) and kinsmen, his younger 
brother (Satrughna) and a host of Brahmanas, with a heart overflowing with affection, 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 973 

Bharata joyfully set forth to receive the All-merciful. Many women, who had climbed up 
their attics, looked above for the aerial car in the sky. And the moment they espied it they 
began in their joy to sing festal songs in melodious strains. Just as the sight of the full 
moon brings joy to the ocean and swells it, the city of Ayodhya too joyfully rushed with 
a tumultuous noise to meet the Lord of the Raghus, the women of the city moving to and 
fro like so many waves. (3 A — C)  
At the other end Sri Rama, who brought delight to the solar race as the sun to 
the lotus, was busy showing the charming city to the monkeys. “Listen, Sugriva (lord of 
the monkeys), Arigada and Vibhisana (lord of Lanka), holy is this city and beautiful this 
land. Although all have extolled Vaikuntha (My divine Abode), which is familiar to the 
Vedas and the Puranas and known throughout the world, it is not so dear to Me as the 
city of Ayodhya: only some rare soul knows this secret. This beautiful city is My 
birthplace; to the north of it flows the holy Sarayu, by bathing in which men secure a 
home near Me without any difficulty. The dwellers here are very dear to Me; the city is 
not only full of bliss itself but bestows a residence in My divine Abode.” The monkeys 
were all delighted to hear these words of the Lord and said, “Blessed indeed is Ayodhya, 
that has evoked praise from Sri Rama Himself!” (1 — 4) 
974 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

When the All-merciful Lord saw all the people coming out to meet Him, He urged 
on the aerial car to halt near the city and so it came down to the ground. On alighting 
from the car, the Lord said to the Puspaka, “You now return to Kubera.” Thus enjoined 
by Sri Rama, the aerial car, departed, full of joy and deep agony at parting. (4 A-B) 
Alongwith Bharata came all the other people, emaciated in body because of their 
separation from the Hero of Raghu’s line. When the Lord saw the great sages 
Vamadeva, Vasistha and others, He dropped His bow and arrows on the ground and ran 
with His brother (Laksmana) to clasp His preceptor’s lotus-feet with every hair on their 
bodies erect. Vasistha (the chief of the sages) embraced them (in return) and enquired 
after their welfare. 6rl Rama replied, “It is in your grace alone that our welfare lies.” The 
Lord of Raghu’s race, the champion of righteousness, now met all the other Brahmanas 
and bowed His head to them. Then Bharata clasped the Lord’s lotus-feet, which are 
adored by gods and sages, Sankara and Brahma not excepted. He lay prostrate on the 
ground and would not rise even though being lifted up, till at last the All-merciful forcibly 
took and pressed him to His bosom. Every hair on His swarthy form stood erect and His 
lotus eyes were flooded with tears. (1 — 4) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 975 
His lotus eyes streamed with tears, while bristling hair served to adorn His comely 
person as Lord 6ri Rama, the sovereign of the three spheres, clasped Bharata to His 
bosom with utmost affection. I find no parallel by which I may illustrate the beauty of the 
Lord’s meeting with his younger brother: it seemed as though the Erotic sentiment and 
affection had met together in exquisite bodily form. The All-merciful enquired after Bharata’s 
welfare; but words did not readily come to his help. Listen, Siva: (continues Lord Siva,) the 
bliss (which Bharata enjoyed at the moment) was beyond one’s speech and mind; it is 
known only to those who feel it. “All is now well with me, since the All-merciful Lord of 
Kosala has blessed me with His sight, realizing the distress of His servant, and taken me 
by the hand just when I was sinking in the ocean of desolation. (1-2) 
The Lord then gladly met Satrughna and pressed him to His bosom. Next came 
the turn of Laksmana and Bharata and the two brothers embraced each other with 
utmost affection. (5) 

976 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Then Laksmana embraced Satrughna (Bharata’s younger brother)* and thus 
relieved each other of the terrible agony of separation. Bharata and Satrughna bowed 
their head at Sita’s feet and felt supreme delight. The citizens were transported with joy 
at the sight of the Lord. All the woes begotten of their separation from the Lord now 
ended. Seeing all the people impatient in thier love to meet the Lord, the All-merciful 
Slayer of Khara wrought a miracle. He forthwith appeared in countless forms and in this 
way the gracious Lord met everybody in an appropriate manner. The Hero of Raghu’s 
line rid all men and women of their sorrow by casting His benign look on them. In a 
moment the Lord greeted them all; Uma, this was a mystery which none could comprehend. 
Having thus gratified all, Sri Rama, who was a repository of amiability and goodness, 
proceeded further. Kausalya and the other mothers all ran out to meet Him, even as a 
cow that has lately calved would run at the sight of its little one. (1 — 5) 
It seemed as though cows that had recently calved and had been forced to go out 
to the woods for grazing, leaving their little ones at home, had at the close of day rushed 
forth lowing towards the village with dripping teats. The Lord met all the mothers with 
utmost affection and spoke many a soft words to them. In this way the dire calamity that 
had come upon them as a result of separation from Sri Rama, came to an end and they 
derived infinite joy and gratification. 
* Although Laksmana and Satrughna were real brothers, the latter bore greater affinity to Bharata and 
preferred to live with him. Hence he is referred to here as Bharata’s younger brother. 




* UTTARA-KANDA * 977 
Sumitra embraced her son (Laksmana) remembering how devoted he was to 
Sri Rama’s feet. As for Kaikeyi, she felt very uncomfortable at heart while embracing 
Sri Rama. Laksmana too embraced all his mothers and was delighted to receive their 
blessings. But even though he met Kaikeyi again and again, his bitterness of feeling 
towards her did not leave him. (6 A-B) 
Videha’s Daughter (Sita) greeted all Her mothers-in-law and was transported with 
joy as She clasped their feet. They enquired after Her welfare and blessed Her : “May your 
married life be happy forever.” All gazed upon the lotus face of Sri Rama (the Lord of the 
Raghus) and, remembering that it was an occasion for rejoicing, checked the tears that 
rose in their eyes. Burning festal lights in gold plates they waved them above Sri Rama’s 
head (in order to ward off ill offect) and again and again contemplated the Lord’s person. 
They scattered every kind of offering about Him, their heart full of supreme felicity and 
jubilation. Again and again did Kausalya gaze upon the Hero of Raghu’s line, who was an 
ocean of compassion and an irresistible warrior, each time pondering within herself : “How 
can he have killed the lord of Lanka? Too delicate of body are my two boys, while the 
demons were great champions of extraordinary might !” (1 — 4) 
978 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 201

As the mother (Kausalya) looked upon the Lord with Laksmana and Sita, her soul 
was overwhelmed with supreme felicity and the hair on her body bristled up again 
and again. (7) 
Vibhisana (the king of Lanka), Sugriva (the lord of the monkeys), Nala, Nila, 
Jambavan, Arigada, Hanuman and the other monkey heroes, who were all of a virtuous 
disposition, had assumed charming human forms. With great reverence and love all 
applauded Bharata’s affection, amiability, austerities and discipline. When they saw the 
citizens’ mode of life, they all extolled their devotion to the Lord’s feet. Then the Lord of the 
Raghus summoned all His comrades and exhorted them : “Clasp the feet of My Guru, the 
sage Vasistha, who is worthy of adoration to our whole race. It was by his grace that all the 
demons were slain in battle.” “(Turning to the sage) Listen, holy Sir: all these My comrades 
proved as so many barks in taking Me across the ocean of the battle. They staked their life 
in My cause: they are dearer to Me even than Bharata.” They were all enraptured to hear 
the Lord’s word; every moment that passed gave birth to some new joy. (1 — 5) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 
979 


Then they bowed their heads at Kausalya’s feet, who rejoiced to give them her blessing, 
adding : “You are as dear to me as the Lord of the Raghus.” The sky was obscured with the 
showers of flowers as the Fountain of joy took His way to the palace. Throngs of men and 
women of the city mounted the attics to have a look at the Lord. (8 A-B) 


All the people placed at their door vases of gold picturesquely decorated and 
equipped with necessary articles. Everyone prepared and set festoons, flags and 
buntings, all to make a glad show. All the streets were sprinkled with perfumes and 
scented water and a number of mystic squares were drawn and filled in with pearls found 
in the projections of an elephant’s forehead. Every kind of festive preparation was taken 
in hand; the city was en fete and a large number of kettledrums sounded all at once. 
Ladies scattered their offerings about the Lord wherever He went, and invoked blessing 
on Him with their hearts full of joy. Bevies of young women sang festal songs, while gold 
plates provided with lights were ready at hand, which they waved about the Lord, who 
is the Reliever of all agony and brought delight to Raghu’s race even as the sun delights 
a bed of lotuses. The splendour, the wealth and the good fortune of the city have been 
extolled by the Vedas, Sesa (the serpent-god) and Sarada (the goddess of speech and 
learning). But they too were dazed to see this spectacle. Uma, (continues Lord Siva,) 
how, then, can any mortal recount His virtues? (1 — 5) 

980 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The women, who were like water-lilies growing in the lake of Ayodhya and had 
been withered by the sun in the form of separation from the Lord of the Raghus, 
blossomed again at the sight of Sri Rama, who resembled the full moon, the sun of 
separation having now set. Auspicious omens of every description occurred and kettle- 
drums sounded in the sky as the Lord proceeded to the palace after blessing the men 
and women of the city with His sight. (9 A-B) 


Bhavani, (continues Lord Siva,) the Lord came to know that Kaikeyi was ashamed 
and went first to her palace. After reassuring and gratifying her much Sri Hari (Sri Rama) 
then moved to His own palace. When the All-merciful entered the palace, every man and 
woman of the city felt gratified. The preceptor, Vasistha called the Brahmanas and said 
to them, “The day and the hour, nay, all the other factors are favourable today. Therefore, 
all of you, Brahmanas, be pleased to order that Sri Ramacandra may occupy the royal 
throne.” On hearing the agreeable words of the sage Vasistha all the Brahmanas warmly 
welcomed them. Many of the Brahmanas spoke in endearing terms, “Sri Rama’s 
coronation will bring delight to the whole world. Delay no more, O good sage, but apply 
the sacred mark on the forehead of His Majesty as a token of sovereignty.” (1 — 4) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 981 
The sage thereupon instructed Sumantra, who, as soon as he received the order, 
merrily proceeded and forthwith got ready a number of chariots and numerous horses 
and elephants. Despatching messengers here and there he sent for auspicious articles, 
then gladly returning to Vasistha, he bowed his head at his feet. (10 A-B) 
The city of Ayodhya was most tastefully decorated and the gods rained down a 
continuous shower of flowers. Sri Rama called His servants and said, “Go and first 
arrange a bath for my comrades.” The moment they heard the command the servants 
ran in all promptness and quickly bathed Sugriva and the rest. The All-merciful Rama 
next called Bharata and disentangled his matted hair with His own hands. The gracious 
and almighty Lord of the Raghus, who is so fond of His devotees, now bathed all His 
three brothers. The blessedness of Bharata and the Lord’s tenderness were both more 
than countless Sesas could sing. Then Sri Rama disentangled His own matted hair, 
and after obtaining the Guru’s permission bathed Himself. Having finished His ablutions, 
the Lord decked Himself with jewels; the beauty of His person put to shame hundreds 
of Cupids. 
982 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
(In the gynaeceum) the mothers-in-law immediately bathed Janaka’s Daughter with 
all tenderness and carefully attired her in heavenly robes with rich jewels for every part 
of Her body. On Sri Rama’s left side shone forth Rama (Laksmi) Herself, a mine of beauty 
and goodness. The mothers were all delighted at the sight and accounted their life as fully 
rewarded. Listen, O king of the birds: (continues Kakabhusundi) on that occasion Brahma 
(the Creator), Lord Siva and multitudes of sages came to see the Fountain of joy and 
so did all the gods, mounted on their aerial cars. (11 A — C) 
The soul of the sage (Vasistha) was enraptured as he gazed upon the Lord; he 
sent at once for a heavenly throne, which was effulgent as the sun and defied all 
description. Bowing His head to the Brahmanas, Sri Rama took His seat thereon. The 
whole host of sages was overjoyed as they looked upon the Lord of the Raghus along- 
with Janaka’s Daughter. Then the Brahmanas recited the Vedic hymns, while in the 
heavens above the gods and sage shouted, “Victory! Victory!” The sage Vasistha first of 




* UTTARA-KANDA * 983 

all applied the sacred mark himself and then he directed all the other Brahmanas to do 
likewise. The mothers were transported with joy at the sight of their son and waved lights 
above His head again and again. They bestowed a variety of gifts on the Brahmanas and 
gave the beggars so much that they begged no more. Perceiving 
the lord of all the three spheres seated on the throne of Ayodhya the gods sounded 
their kettledrums. (1 — 4) 
A large number of kettledrums sounded in the heavens above; the Gandharvas 
and Kinnaras (the celestial musicians) sang and heavenly nymphs danced to the 
supreme delight of the gods and sages. Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna with 
Vibhisana, Arigada, Hanuman and the rest shone forth beside the Lord each holding 
severally the royal umbrella, chowrie, fan, bow, sword with shield and spear. With 
Laksmi (Sita) by His side the Jewel of the solar race shone forth with the beauty of a 
myriad Cupids. His exquisite form, possessing the hue of a fresh rain-cloud, clad in 
yellow robes, enchanted the soul of gods. A diadem, armlets and other marvellous 
ornaments adorned the various parts of His body; He had lotus-like eyes and a broad 
chest and long arms. Blessed indeed are those men who behold such a form. (1-2) 
984 


*SRl RAMACARITAMANASA * 
O king of the birds, (continues Kakabhusundi), the beauty of the sight, the 
uniqueness of the assembly and the delight of the occasion each defied description. 
Sarada (the goddess of learning), Sesa (the thousand-headed serpent-god) and the 
Vedas ever describe them; while their sapor is known to the great Lord Siva alone. 
Having severally hymned the Lord’s praises the gods returned each to his own abode. 
Then came the Vedas, in the disguise of bards, into the presence of Sri Rama. The 
omniscient and All-merciful Lord received them with great honour, though none else could 
penetrate into the mystery; and the bards began to recite His praises: — (12 A — C) 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 985 
“Hail, Crest-Jewel of kings, incomparable is your beauty; though transcending 
Maya and her attributes, you possess innumerable divine attributes. You killed by the 
might of Your arm fierce, mighty and wicked demons like the ten-headed Ravana. 
Appearing in human garb, you crushed the armies that constituted the Earth’s burden 
and ended her terrible woes. Hail, merciful Lord, Protector of the suppliant ! We adore 
986 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
you with Your Spouse. Subject to Your relentless Maya (deluding potency), O Hari, 
gods and demons, Nagas and human beings, nay, all animate and inanimate beings 
wander for numberless days and nights in the path of metempsychosis impelled by 
Time, Karma (destiny) and the Gunas (modes of Prakrti). Those, O Lord, whom You 
ever regarded with compassion have been rid of the threefold affliction. Protect us, 
Rama, prompt as You are in putting an end to the toils of mundane existence; we 
adore You. Intoxicated with the pride of wisdom, they who respect not Devotion to 
You, which takes away the fear of transmigration, may climb up to a rank which even 
gods find it difficult to attain; yet, O Hari, we see them fall from it. On the other hand, 
they who have abandoned all other hopes and with unqualified faith choose to remain 
Your servants easily cross the ocean of transmigration by merely repeating Your 
name. It is for this reason, O Lord, that we particularly invoke You. O Mukunda 
(Bestower of Liberation), O Rama, O Lord of Rama (Laksmi), we ever adore Your 
lotus-feet, which are worthy of adoration to Lord Siva and the unborn Brahma, the 
touch of whose blessed dust redeemed Ahalya (the wife of the sage Gautama), from 
whose nails flowed the heavenly stream (Gariga) — which is reverenced even by the 
sages and sanctifies all the three spheres — and the soles of which, while bearing 
the marks of a flag, thunderbolt, goad and lotus, are further adorned by scars left by 
thorns that pricked them in course of Your wanderings in the forest. We further adore 
You as the tree of the universe, which, as the Vedas and the Agamas (Tantras) 
declare, has its root in the Unmanifest (Brahma) and has existed from time without 
beginning; which has four coats* of bark, six stems, twenty-five boughs, numberless 
leaves and abundant flowers; which bears two kinds of fruits — bitter and sweet, 
which has a solitary creeper clinging to it and which puts on ever fresh foliage and 
evernew flowers. Let those who meditate on Brahma (the Absolute) as unborn, the 
one without a second, perceptible only through intuition and as beyond the ken of 
mind, preach and believe like that. We, for our part, O Lord, ever chant the glories 
of Your visible form. O All-merciful and All-effulgent Lord, O mine of noble virtues, 
this is the boon we ask of You: may we love Your feet, casting off all aberrations of 
thought, word and deed.” (1 — 6) 
* The four states of consciousness, viz., waking life (wrcnr), dream (wa), sound sleep (13ft) and the 
pure impersonal state (iffa) are the four coats of bark referred to here; the six states of existence, viz., to be 
(srfeD, to come into being to undergo transformation (ftafwrft), to grow to decay (#aft) and to 

perish are the six stems; the twenty-five categories of which this world of matter is composed (viz., 
Prakfti or Primordial Matter, Mahat or Cosmic Reason, Ahankara or the Cosmic Ego-sense, Manas or the 
Cosmic Mind, Citta or the Cosmic Intellect, the five senses of perception, viz., the senses of hearing, touch, 
sight, taste and smell, the five subtle elements (Tanmatras) and the five Mahabhutas are the twenty-five 
boughs; the countless latent desires are the numberless leaves, the numerous acts of volition to attain such 
desires are the abundant flowers, pleasure and pain are the twofold fruit and Maya (Cosmic Illusion) is the 
creeper that clings to this tree of the universe. 

987 


* UTTARA-KANDA* 
While everyone looked on, the Vedas uttered their grand prayer; and then they 
vanished out of sight and returned to Brahma’s abode (Satyaloka or the seventh 
Paradise). Listen, O Garuda (son of Vinata): then came Sambhu (Lord Siva) into the 
presence of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) and with a choking voice and every hair 
on his body standing erect He thus made supplication: — (13 A-B) 

988 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


 “Hail to You, Rama, Rama’s (Sita’s) Spouse, Reliever of the afflictions of worldly 
existence ! Protect this servant, who is obsessed with the fear of transmigration. O 
King of Ayodhya, Ruler of the gods, Lord of Laksmi, all-pervading Master! Having fled 
to You for refuge, I implore You: pray, extend Your protection to Me. By disposing 
of Ravana who possessed as many as ten heads and twenty arms. You rid the earth 
of many a severe scourge. The hosts of demons were a veritable swarm of moths 
that were reduced to ashes by the fierce glow of Your fire-like arrows. An exceedingly 
beautiful jewel of the terrestrial globe, You have armed Yourself with an excellent bow, 
arrows and quiver. You are a radiant sun as it were to disperse the thick darkness 
prevailing in the night of pride, gross ignorance and attachment. The hunter in the form 
of lust has laid low the human deer by piercing his heart with the shafts of evil desire: 

0 Lord ! pray, kill the hunter and thus save the life of these poor helpless creatures, 
lost as they are in the wilderness of sensuality, O Hari ! People are stricken with a 
host of diseases and bereavements, which are surely the result of neglecting Your 
feet. Those men who cherish no love for your lotus-feet continue to drift in the fathomless 
ocean of mundane existence. They are ever most wretched, impure and unhappy, who 
have no devotion to Your lotus-feet. On the other hand, they who derive their sustenance 
from Your stories hold the saints and the eternal Lord (Yourself) as constantly dear 
to them. They are free from passion, greed, pride and arrogance; prosperity and 
adversity are alike to them. That is why sages give up forever all faith in Yoga (mental 
discipline) and gladly become Your servants. With a pure heart and under a solemn 
pledge they constantly and lovingly adore Your lotus-feet. Regarding honour and 
ignominy alike, all such saints move about happily on earth. O Hero of Raghu’s line, 
invincible and exceedingly staunch in battle, indwelling as a bee the lotus heart of sages, 

1 take refuge in You. I repeat Your Name and bow to You, O Hari; You are a sovereign 

remedy for the disease of birth and death and an enemy of pride. I constantly greet 
You, Laksmi’s Spouse, supreme abode of goodness, amiability and compassion. O 
Delight of the Raghus, put an end to all pairs of contrary experiences (such as joy 
and sorrow, pleasure and pain, attraction and repulsion, etc.); O Ruler of the earth, 
just cast a glance on this humble servant. (1 — 10) 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 989 
Chapter 202
 “Again and again I ask only this boon of You — be pleased to grant it, O Lord of 
Laksmi: unceasing devotion to Your lotus-feet and constant communion with your 
devotees.” Having thus hymned Sri Rama’s praises, Lima’s Lord (Siva) joyously 
returned to Kailasa. The Lord then assigned the monkeys residences that were 
comfortable in every respect. (14 A-B) 
Listen, O king of the birds, (continues Kakabhusundi): this story purifies the heart 
and rids one of the threefold affliction and the fear of birth and death. By hearing the 
narrative of King Rama’s blessed Coronation men acquire dispassion and discernment. 
Those men who hear or sing it with some interested motive attain happiness and 
prosperity of every kind; after enjoying in this world pleasures to which even gods can 
scarce attain they ascend to Sri Rama’s divine Abode at the end of their earthly career. 
If a liberated soul, a man of dispassion and a sensual person hear it, they severally 
990 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
obtain Devotion, final beatitude and everincreasing prosperity. O king of the birds, 
(continues Kakabhusundi,) the story of Sri Rama, that I have narrated according to my 
own lights, takes away the fear of birth and death and rids one of sorrow. It confirms 
one’s dispassion, discernment and devotion and is a splendid boat to take one across 
the river of ignorance. Everyday there was some new rejoicing in Kosalapura (the city 
of Ayodhya) people of all classes were happy. Everybody cherished an ever-growing 
affection for Sri Rama’s lotus-feet, which are adored even by Lord Siva, Brahma (the 
Unborn) and the sages. Mendicants were provided with clothes of various kinds; while 
the twice-born (Brahmanas) received gifts of every description. (1 — 5) 

The monkeys were drowned in the joy of absorption into Brahma; all were devoted to 
the Lord’s feet. Days rolled by them unnoticed till a period of six months had elapsed. (15) 

They had forgotten their home so completely that they never thought of it even in 
a dream any more than a saint would harbour ill-will towards another. The Lord of the 
Raghus then called all His comrades; all came and bowed their heads with reverence. 
Most lovingly He seated them by His side and addressed them in tender words, which 
were the delight of devotees: “You have rendered unstinted service to Me; but how can 
I praise you to your face? You renounced your home and comforts on My account; hence 
you have endeared yourselves most to Me. My younger brothers, My crown, My fortune, 
Sita (My spouse), My life, My home, My near and dear ones are all dear to Me; but none 
so dear as you; I tell you no untruth, I simply reveal My nature to you. Every master, as 
a rule, loves his servant; but I, for one, am exceptionally fond of My servants. (1 — 4) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 


991 

 “Now, My comrades, return to your homes all of you, and, worship Me with a 
steadfast vow. Knowing Me as omnipresent and friendly to all, love Me most dearly.” (16) 
On hearing the Lord’s words all were so enraptured that they forgot their bodily 
existence and did not know who and where they were. Joining their palms they stood 
looking on with unwinking eyes; they were too overwhelmed with love to speak anything. 
The Lord perceived their excessive fondness and gave them special instruction in 
wisdom inculcating the truth on them in various ways. They, however, could not utter a 
word in the presence of the Lord; they would simply gaze on His lotus-feet again and 
again. The Lord then called for jewels and costumes of various colours, incomparably 
beautiful; and Bharata with his own hands got ready a set with which he invested 
SugrTva first of all. By the Lord’s command Laksmana then invested Vibhisana (the king 
of Lanka) with another set, which gladdened the heart of SrT Rama (the Lord of the 
Raghus). Arigada, however, remained seated and refused to stir; and the Lord who saw 
his affection did not call him. (1 — 4) 

992 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Then the Lord of the Raghus Himself invested with clothes and jewels Jambavan, 
Nila and all the rest; and enshrining Sri Rama’s image in their heart they all bowed their 
heads at His feet and took their leave. Now Arigada arose and bowed his head; and with 
joined palms and eyes full of tears he addressed the Lord in words which were not only most polite but steeped as it were, in the nectar of love: — (17 A-B) 
 “Listen, all-wise, all-merciful and all-blissful Lord, full of compassion to the meek and 
the befriender of the afflicted; it was in Your charge, my lord, that Vali (my father) left me 
while departing from this world. Therefore, recalling Your vow of affording protection to the 
forlorn, forsake me not, O benefactor of the devotees. You are my master, preceptor, father 
and mother, all in one; where can I go, leaving Your lotus-feet? Ponder Yourself and tell 
me, O Ruler of men; severed from You, of what use is my home to me? Extend Your 
protection to this humble servant, a mere child, without knowledge, reason or strength. I 
will do all menial service in your household and shall cross the ocean of mundane 
existence by the mere sight of Your lotus-feet.” So saying he fell at His feet, adding, “Save 
me, my lord, and tell me no more, my master, to return home.” (1 — 4) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 


993 
Hearing Ahgada’s humble entreaty Lord Sri Rama, the perfection of tenderness, 
raised him and clasped him to His bosom, His lotus eyes streaming with tears. 
Investing Vaii’s son (Arigada) with the needace that hung on His own bosom as well 
as with His own robes and jewels, the Lord then sent him away with many words of 
consolation. (18 A-B) 

Conscious of the devotees’ services, Bharata as well as his younger brother (Satrughna) 
and Laksmana (Sumitra’s son) proceeded to see them off. Ahgada’s heart was so full of 
love that he would turn again and again to have one more look at Sri Rama. He would 
repeatedly prostrate himself on the ground and expected that Sri Rama might ask him to 
stay on. He became sad as he recalled the characteristic way in which Sri Rama looked, 
talked, walked and smilingly greeted His friends. But when he perceived in the Lord’s look 
what was in His mind, he departed with many a word of prayer, impressing His lotus-feet on 
his heart. Having seen all the monkeys off with utmost respect, Bharata and his younger 
brothers returned. Then Hanuman (who had evidently accompanied his master to see him 
off) clasped the feet of Sugriva and sought his favour in many ways : “After spending a few 
more days in the service of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), if you please, I will see your 
feet again, my master.” “A storehouse of merit as you are, O son of the wind-god, you go 
and serve the All-merciful.” So saying, all the monkeys forthwith departed. Arigada, however, 
tarried to say, Listen, Hanuman: — (1 — 5) 

994 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “With joined palms I beseech you: please convey my prostrations to the Lord and 
remember me to Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) from time to time.” So saying, Vali’s 
son (Arigada) started on his journey; while Hanuman came back and told the Lord of 
Ahgada’s love, which filled the Lord with ecstatic delight. Harder far than adamant and 
softer than a flower is the heart of Sri Rama, O king of the birds, (continues Kakabhusundi): 
tell me, who can know it? (19 A — C) 
Next the All-merciful summoned the Nisada chief (Guha) and presented him with 
jewels and raiment as a token of His pleasure. “Now return to your home; but remember 
Me and follow the dictates of Dharma in thought, word and deed. You, My friend, are as 



* UTTARA-KANDA* 


995 


much My brother as Bharata; you must continue to visit the capital every now and then.” 
Guha was immensely gratified to hear these words; he fell at the Lord’s feet, his eyes full of 
tears. Enshrining an image of His lotus feet in his heart he returned home and told his 
kinsmen of the Lord’s amiable disposition. Witnessing the doings of Sri Rama (the Lord of 
the Raghus) the citizens repeatedly said, “Blessed is the All-blissful Lord !” Sri Rama’s 
installation to the throne brought joy to all the three spheres and ended all their sorrows. No 
one bore enmity to another; Sri Rama’s glory had obliterated all disharmony. (1 — 4) 
Devoted to duty each according to his own caste and stage of life, the people trod 
the path of the Vedas and enjoyed happiness. They knew no fear, nor sorrow nor 
disease. (20) 

Chapter 203
Under the rule of Rama there was none who suffered from affliction of any 
kind — whether of the body, or proceeding from divine or supernatural agencies or that 
caused by another living being. All men loved one another : each followed one’s 
prescribed duty, conformably to the precepts of the Vedas. Dharma with its four pillars 
(viz., truth, purity — both external and internal, compassion and charity) reigned 
everywhere throughout the world; no one even dreamt of sin. Men and women alike were 
devoted to Sri Rama’s worship and all were qualified for final beatitude. There was no 
premature death nor suffering of any kind; everyone was comely and sound of body. No 
one was destitute, afflicted or miserable; no one was stupid or devoid of auspicious marks. 
All were unaffectedly good, pious and virtuous; all were clever and accomplished — both 
men and women. Everyone recognized the merits of others and was learned and wise; 




996 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


nay, everyone acknowledged the services and benefits received from others and there 
was no guileful prudence. (1 — 4) 
Listen, O king of the birds, (continues Kakabhusundi,) during Sri Rama’s reign 
there was not a creature in this world, animate or inanimate, that was liable to any of the 
sufferings attributable to time, past conduct, personal temperament and character. (21) 


Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), who reigned in Ayodhya, was the undisputed 
sovereign of the entire globe girdled by the seven oceans. This lordship (of the entire 
globe) was nothing great for Him every hair-hole in whose (Cosmic) body contains 
myriads of universes. To him who has realized such infinite greatness of the Lord, 
even this description (viz., to speak of Him as the sovereign of the entire globe) will 
sound highly disparaging. But even those, O king of the birds, (continues Kakabhusundi) 
who have realized the greatness of the Lord (as indicated above) have turned round 
and conceived a fondness for this story of the Lord. For the immediate perception of 
such exploits of the Lord is the reward of knowing His infinite greatness; so declare 
the greatest of sages that have subdued their senses. The happiness and prosperity 
of Sri Rama’s reign were more than even Sesa (the serpent-god) and Sarada (the 
goddess of learning) could describe. All were generous and all beneficent; men and 
women alike were devoted to the feet of the Brahmanas. Every husband was pledged 
to a vow of monogamy and the wives too were devoted to their husband in thought, 
word and deed. (1 — 4) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 
997 

 ‘Danda’* was never seen save in the hands of the recluse and ‘Bheda’ too had 
ceased to exist except among the dancers in a dancing party. Even so the order ‘Conquer!’ 
was heard only with reference to the mind throughout the realm of Sri Ramachandra. (22) 
Trees in the forest blossomed and bore fruit throughout the year; the elephant and 
the lion lived together as friends. Nay, birds and beasts of every description had 
forgotten their natural animosities and developed friendly relations with one another. 
Birds sang and beasts fearlessly moved about in the woods in distinct herds, making 
merry all the time. The air breathed cool, soft and fragrant; bees hummed even as they 
* Our scriptures have recognized four common methods of persuasion, viz., (1) Sama (argument or 
expostulation), (2) Dana (inducement in the shape of gift etc.), (3) Danda (use of force or corporal 
punishment) and (4) Bheda (sowing seeds of dissension); it is the last two of the above four methods that 
are evidently referred to in this context. There is however, a pun on these words. The word ‘Danda’ when 
used with reference to a recluse denotes the staff which he is required to carry as a symbol of self-restraint; 
and ‘Bheda’ ordinarily means variety. The poet thus seeks to convey through this verse that during SrT 
Rama’s reign such absolute harmony and moral uprightness prevailed throughout the world that the last 
two methods of persuasion had become entirely obsolete. The word ‘Danda’ was understood only in the 
sense of a staff carried by a SarhnyasT and the word ‘Bheda’ merely conveyed the variety of notes and 
cadence displayed in music and dancing. Similarly, since there was no enemy to conquer, the only object 
to be conquered was the mind. 




998 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


moved about laden with honey. Creepers and trees dropped honey to those who asked 
for it; cows yielded milk to one’s heart’s content. The earth was ever clothed with crops; 
even in the Treta age the conditions of the Satyayuga prevailed. Conscious of the fact 
that the Ruler of the earth was no other than the Universal Spirit, the mountains brought 
to light their mines containing jewels of every description. Every river carried in it 
excellent water — cool, limpid and pleasant to the taste. The oceans kept within their 
bounds and scattered jewels on their shores for men to gather. Ponds were all thick with 
lotuses and every quarter was clear and bright. (1 — 5) 
The moon flooded the earth with her rays, while the sun shone just as much as 
was necessary. Similarly clouds poured forth showers for the mere asking so long as 
Sri Ramacandra wielded the sceptre. (23) 
The Lord performed myriads of horse-sacrifices and bestowed innumerable gifts 
on the Brahmanas. The Defender of the Vedic usage and the champion of righteousness, 
He transcended the three modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and was another 
Indra (the lord of paradise) so for as enjoyment was concerned. A mine of beauty, 
virtuous and meek, Sita was ever devoted to Her lord. She knew the greatness of the 
All-merciful Lord and adored His lotus-feet with a devoted heart. Although there were 
many man-servants and maid-servants in Her palace, all expert in the art of service, 
She did all household work with Her own hands and carried out the behests of 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 


999 


Sri Ramacandra. Sita invariably did what would afford delight to the All-merciful, 
conversant as She was with the art of service. Devoid of pride and conceit, She waited 
upon Kausalya and all the other mothers-in-law in the palace. Uma, (continues Lord 
Siva,) Sita was no other than Goddess Rama (Laksmi), the Mother of the universe, who 
is adored even by Brahma and other gods and is ever flawless. (1 — 5) 
The same Laksmi whose benign look is craved by the gods but who never casts a 
glance at them constantly loves Sri Rama’s lotus feet, forgetting Her natural majesty. (24) 
Chapter 204
All the younger brothers served the Lord with great fidelity; for their love for Sri Rama 
knew no bounds. They ever kept gazing on His lotus face in the hope that the benign 
Lord might give some order to them at any moment. Sri Rama too loved His younger 
brothers and taught them wisdom of every kind. The citizens led a happy life and enjoyed 
all sorts of pleasures which even gods could scarcely obtain. Day and night they prayed 
to God and sought the boon of devotion to the feet of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s 
line). Sita gave birth to two pretty sons, Lava and Kusa by name, who have figured in 
the Vedas and Puranas. Both these boys were victorious in battle, modest, accomplished 
and handsome, the very images as it were, of Sri Hari (Rama). Sri Rama’s other brothers 
too had two sons each, pre-eminent in comeliness of form, merit and virtue. (1 — 4) 

1000 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The same Brahma who is beyond all knowledge, speech and sense-perception, 
nay, who is unborn and transcends Maya (Prakrti or Matter), the mind and the modes 
of Prakrti and is truth, knowledge and bliss solidified, exhibited the ideal behaviour of a 
human being. (25) 
After taking a bath in the Sarayu early in the morning the Lord sat in an assembly 
of Brahmanas and holy men. The sage Vasistha expounded the Vedas and Puranas, 
while Sri Rama listened to the exposition, even though He knew everything Himself. He 
took His meals with His younger brothers and the sight filled all the mothers with joy. The 
two brothers, Bharata and Satrughna, would accompany the son of the wind-god to some 
grove, where they would sit and ask Hanuman to expatiate on Sri Rama’s virtues, and 
Hanuman would plunge his sound intellect into the ocean of His virtues and then recount 
them. The two brothers derived much joy from the discourse on His immaculate virtues 
and with much entreaty had it repeated again and again. Everywhere — in every house 
the people recited the Puranas and narrated Sri Rama’s holy exploits of a diverse 
character. Men and women alike joined in hymning Sri Rama’s praises and days and 
nights passed on unnoticed. (1 — 4) 
Not a thousand Sesas could tell all the happiness and prosperity of the people of 
Ayodhya, where Sri Rama reigned as King. (26) 
1001 
All great sages like Narada, Sanaka and others came to Ayodhya everyday to 
have a sight of the Lord of Kosala, and forgot all their indifference to the world the 
moment they saw the city, with its attics built of gold and jewels and having splendid 
pavements laid in diverse colours. A most beautiful boundary wall with its battlements 
painted in different colours enclosed the city on all sides, as though the nine planets had 
mustered a large army and besieged Amaravati (Indra’s capital). The ground (the streets 
and squares etc.,) was so beautifully paved with crystals of various colours that the mind 
of the greatest Sages would be enraptured at the sight. The white palaces were so high 
as to reach the skies; their shining pinnacles put to shame as it were, the effulgence of 
the sun and the moon. Latticed windows made of diverse precious stones shone here and 
there; while every house was lit up with jewels that served as lamps. (1 — 4) 
The mansions were illumined by jewels that served as so many lamps and had 
shining thresholds made of coral, pillars of jewels and walls of gold inlaid with emeralds, 
which were as lovely as though they had been built by the Creator (Brahma) himself. 
Beautiful, charming and commodious as the palaces were, they had their courtyards 

1002 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


inworked with crystal, and every gate thereof was provided with doors of gold embossed 
with diamonds. 
Every house equipped with a hall adorned with lovely frescos which had Sri 
Rama’s exploits reproduced in such beautiful colours that they would ravish the soul of 
a sage who looked at them. (27) 
Everyone had a flower garden planted in a characteristic design and trimmed with 
the greatest care, in which beautiful and lovely creepers of every variety blossomed all 
the year round as in the vernal season. Bees hummed in a pleasant strain and a 
delightful breeze breathed cool, soft and fragrant. Birds of all kinds, reared by the 
children, sang in melodious notes and looked graceful in their flight. Peacocks, swans, 
cranes and pigeons presented a most lovely sight on the houses, warbling and dancing 
in a variety of ways at the sight of their own shadow reflected everywhere (on the glossy 
surface of the roofs and balconies etc.). The children taught parrots and Mainas to repeat 
the words, “Rama, Raghupati (the Lord of the Raghus), the Protector of His devotees.” 
The gates of the royal palace were magnificent in everyway; the streets, cross-roads 
and bazars were all splendid. (1 — 4) 
* UTTARA-KANDA * 1003 
The bazars were splendid beyond description; things could be had without any 
consideration there. How can anyone describe the wealth of the city where the Abode 
of Laksmi Himself reigned as King? The cloth- merchants, bankers and other dealers sat 
at their shops like so many Kuberas (gods of riches). All men and women, children and 
aged folk alike were happy, all of good conduct and comely in appearance. 
To the north (of the city) flowed the deep and limpid stream of the Sarayu with a 
line of charming ghatss and no trace of mud at the bank. ( 28 ) 
Apart from the other ghat and situated at some distance from them was the fine 
ghat where multitudes of horses and elephants went to drink. There were numerous 
most charming ghat for women to take water from, where men did not bathe. The best 
of all and beautiful in everyway was the royal ghat, where men of all the four castes 
could bathe. All along the bank stood temples sacred to the gods and surrounded by 


1004 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


lovely groves. Here and there on the river bank dwelt sages and recluses unconcerned 
with the world and devoted to spiritual wisdom. All along the bank stood in clusters many 
a lovely Tulasi plant reared by hermits. The splendour of the city defied all description; 
its outskirts too were most picturesque. The very sight of the city with its groves and 
gardens, wells and ponds, drove away all one’s sins. (1 — 4) 

Its peerless ponds and tanks and charming and spacious wells looked so beautiful 
with their elegant flights of steps and limpid water that even gods and sages were 
fascinated by their sight. The lakes were adorned with many-coloured lotuses and 
resounded with the cooing of the numerous birds and the humming of the bees; and the 
delightful gardens seemed to invite the passers-by through the notes of the cuckoos and 
other birds. 
Is it ever possible to describe the city of which Rama’s lord was the King ? Anima 
(the power of assuming atomic size) and all other superhuman powers and even so joys 
and riches of every kind stayed in Ayodhya forever. (29) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1005 
Everywhere men sang the praises of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), and even 
as they sat this is how they exhorted one another: “Worship Sri Rama, the Protector of 
the suppliant, the home of elegance, amiability, beauty and goodness, who has lotus-like 
eyes and swarthy limbs, who looks after His servants even as the eyelids guard the eye- 
balls, who is armed with a splendid bow, arrows and quiver and is staunch in battle, who 
delights the saints even as the sun brings joy to a bed of lotuses, who is a Garuda (the 
king of the birds) to devour the dreadful serpent in the form of Death, who destroys the 
feeling of mineness the moment a person bows to Him in a disinterested spirit, and who 
is a hunter to kill the herd of deer in the form of greed and infatuation, a lion to quell the 
elephant of concupiscence, the delight of His servants, a sun to scatter the thick darkness 
of doubt and sorrow, and a fire to consume the dense forest of the demon race. Oh, why 
should you not adore the Hero of Raghu’s line, ever accompanied by Janaka’s Daughter, 
who dispels the fear of transmigration, who plays the role of frost to destroy mosquitoes 
in the disguise of manifold latent desires, who is ever unchangeable, unborn and 
imperishable, the delight of the sages, the reliever of the earth’s burdens, the munificent 
lord of Tulasidasa.” (1 — 5) 
In this way the men and women of the city sang Sri Rama’s praises and the All- 
merciful was ever favaurable to all. (30) 

1006 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
From the time, O king of the birds, (continues Kakabhusundi,) the most dazzling 
sun of Sri Rama’s glory appeared on the horizon the three spheres were all flooded with 
light, which brought delight to many and sorrow to many others. First I enumerate at 
length those to whom it caused sorrow. To begin with, the night of ignorance terminated; 
the owl-like sins hid themselves wherever they could; the white lily in the form of lust and 
anger closed. Cakora birds in the shape of activities of various kinds, the phenomenal 
existence, Time and Nature never rejoiced; thieves like jealousy, pride, infatuation and 
arrogance had no occasion to display their skill in any quarter; lotuses of every description 
in the shape of knowledge and realization opened in the pond of piety. Happiness, 
contentment, dispassion and discernment, like so many Cakravaka birds, were rid of 
sorrow. (1 — 4) 

When the sun of Sri Rama’s glory illumines the heart of an individual, the qualities 
enumerated in the end grow while those mentioned in the beginning die away. (31) 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 1007 
Chapter 205
One day, Sri Rama and his brothers, accompanied by His most favourite Hanuman, 
went to see the beautiful grove, where the trees were all blossoming and had put on fresh 
leaves. Finding it a good opportunity the sage Sanaka* and his three brothers (Sanandana, 
Sanatana and Sanatkumara) arrived there. They were all embodiments of spiritual glow, 
adorned with amiability and other noble qualities and constantly absorbed in the ecstasy 
of union with Brahma; though infants to all appearance, they are aeons old. The sages 
looked upon all with the same eye and were above all diversity; it seemed as if the four 
Vedas had each assumed a bodily form. They had no covering on their body except the 
quarters; and their only hobby was to hear the recital of Sri Rama’s exploits wherever 
it was carried on. Sanaka and his brothers, O Bhavani, (continues Lord Siva,) had 
stayed in the hermitage of the enlightened sage Agastya and the noble sage had narrated 
to them many a story relating to Sri Rama, which are productive of wisdom in the same 
way as the friction of two pieces of wood produces fire. (1 — 4) 
Sri Rama saw the sages approaching and gladly prostrated Himself before them. 
And after an enquiry about their health etc., the Lord spread His own yellow scarf for 
them to squat on. (32) 

All His three brothers (Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna) then prostrated themselves 
alongwith Hanuman and everyone felt very happy. The sages were beside themselves 

* The sage Sanaka and his three brothers are the first progeny of Brahma during the present creation, 
and therefore the eldest of all creation. They are perpetual celibates and are still living in the abode of 
Brahma, their present age being computed at 1,95,00,00,000 odd years. 

1008 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


with rapture on beholding the incomparable beauty of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). 
They remained gazing with unwinking eyes on the Lord, who is the abode of comeliness 
and brings about release from worldly existence and has a swarthy form and lotus-eyes. 
The Lord in His turn bowed His head with joined palms. When the Hero of Raghu’s line 
perceived their condition, His eyes too streamed with tears and every hair on His body 
stood on its end. Taking them by the hand, the Lord seated them and addressed them 
in most charming words : “Listen, great sages: I am indeed blessed today. By your very 
sight all one’s sins are wiped out. By extreme good luck one is able to secure the 
company of saints; for through such communion the chain of births and deaths is broken 
without the least exertion. (1 — 4) 
 “Communion with saints is the road to emancipation, while that of the sensualist 
paves the way for transmigration: so declare the saints themselves, the men of wisdom 
and the learned, as well as the Vedas, Puranas and other real scriptures.” (33) 

The four sages were all rejoiced to hear the Lord’s words and with every hair on 
their body standing erect they proceeded to hymn His praises : “Glory to the Almighty 
Lord, who is infinite, immutable and sinless, who is one as well as many and all- 
gracious ! Glory to the Lord who is beyond the modes of Prakrti ! Glory, glory to the 
Ocean of goodness, the Abode of bliss, handsome and most urbane in manners. Glory 
to Indira’s (Laksmi’s) Spouse ! Glory to the Supporter of the earth, peerless, unborn and 
dateless, a mine of elegance. A storehouse of wisdom that You are, You are free from 
pride and yet bestow honour on others : the Vedas and Purana’s sing Your sanctifying 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 1009 

glory. Knower of Truth, You acknowledge the services of Your devotees and destroy their 
ignorance. Untainted by Maya, You bear numberless names and are yet beyond all. You 
are manifest as all, pervade all and dwell in the heart of all; therefore, protect us every 
moment. Break asunder the bonds in the form of pairs of opposites (such as heat and 
cold, joy and sorrow, etc.,) adversity and mundane existence; and abiding in our heart, 
O Rama, eradicate our sensuality and vanity. (1 — 4) 

 “You are supreme bliss personified and the abode of mercy and fulfil the desire of 
Your devotees’ heart. Pray, grant us the boon of unceasing love and devotion (to Your 
feet), O graceful Rama.” (34) 
 “Bestow on us, O Lord of the Raghus, that most sanctifying devotion which 
destroys the threefold agony and the turmoils of transmigration. A celestial cow and a 
wish-yielding tree to satisfy the desires of the suppliant, be propitious, my lord, and grant 
this boon. A veritable jar-born sage (Agastya) to suck up the ocean of mundane 
existence, O Chief of the Raghus, You are easy of access to those who adore You and 
bestow all blessings on them. Put an end to the terrible sufferings caused by the mind and 
diffuse even-mindedness in us, O befriender of the meek. O banisher of hope (of 
gratifying oneself through self-indulgence), fear, jealousy etc., and propagator of humility, 
right judgment and dispassion, crest-jewel of earthly kings, and ornament of the earth, 

1010 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


grant us devotion to Your feet, which serves as a boat to take one across the river of 
mundane existence. A swan that You are, constantly residing in the Manasa lake of the 
sages’ mind, Your lotus feet are adored even by Brahma and Lord Sankara. Glory of 
Raghu’s race, custodian of the Vedic laws, devourer of time, destiny, Prakrti (Primordial 
Nature) and the three Gunas You are both the boatman and the boat to take Your 
devotees across the ocean of metempsychosis and the stealer of all vices, the lord of 
Tulasidasa, the jewel of the three spheres.” (1 — 5) 

Having thus extolled the Lord again and again, Sanaka and his three brothers 
lovingly bowed their head and, having obtained their most cherished boon, returned to Brahma’s abode. 
When Sanaka and his brothers had left for Brahma’s abode, the three brothers 
(Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna) bowed their head at Sri Rama’s feet; but being too 
modest themselves to interrogate the Lord, they all looked at the son of the wind-god.

Chapter 206 
They wished to hear from the Lord’s own mouth something which would eradicate all the 
misconceptions. The Lord, however, who regulates the internal feelings of all, came to 
know everything and enquired : “Tell me, Hanuman, what is the matter?” Hanuman 
replied with joined palms, “Listen, O lord, compassionate as You are to the meek. 
Bharata, my lord, wishes to ask something; but he is too diffident at heart to put the 
question.” “Hanuman, you know my disposition. Has there ever been any secrecy 
between Bharata and myself?” On hearing the Lord’s words Bharata clasped His feet. 
1011 

Listen, my lord, reliever of the suppliant’s agony: — (1 — 4) 
 “I have no doubts whatever, my lord, nor have I ever known any dejection or infatuation 
even in a dream. It is all due to Your grace, O all-merciful and all blissful Lord.” (36) 
 “Yet, O storehouse of compassion, I make bold to make one submission, I being 
Your servant and You the delight of Your devotees. The glory of the saints, O Lord of 
the Raghus, has been sung in various ways by the Vedas and Puranas. You too have 
exalted them by Your own graceful mouth and my lord bears great affection for them. I 
would fain hear, my lord, their distinctive marks, O Ocean of compassion, conspicuous 
as You are by Your excellences and wisdom. O protector of the suppliant, tell me clearly 
and severally the distinguishing traits of the good and the wicked.” “Hear, brother, the 
characteristics of saints, which as told in the Vedas and Puranas are innumerable. The 
conduct of saints and the wicked is analogous to that of sandalwood and the axe. Mark, 
brother : the axe cuts down a sandal-tree, while the latter in its turn perfumes the axe by 
imparting its virtue (fragrance) to it.” (1 — 4) 

1012 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


“For this reason sandalwood (in the form of paste) finds its way to the head of gods 
(their images) and is loved by the world so much; while the axe has its steel edge heated 
in the fire and beaten with a hammer as punishment.” (37) 
 “Saints as a rule have no hankering for the pleasures of sense and are the very 
mines of amiability and other virtues. They grieve to see others in distress and rejoice 
at the sight of others’ joy. They are even-minded and look upon none as their enemy. 
Free from vanity and passion, they are conquerers of greed, anger, joy and fear. Tender 
of heart and compassionate to the distressed, they cherish guileless devotion to Me in 
thought, word and deed; and giving honour to all, they are modest themselves. Such 
souls, Bharata, are dear to Me as life. Having no interested motive of their own they are 
devoted to My Name and are abodes of tranquillity, dispassion, humility and good 
humour. Again, know him for all time, dear brother, a genuine saint, whose heart is a 
home of all such noble qualities as placidity, guilelessness, friendliness and devotion to 
the feet of the Brahmanas, which is the fountain of all virtues. They never swerve from 
the control of their mind and senses, religious observances and correct behaviour and 
never utter a harsh word.” (1 — 4) 
 “They who regard both obloquy and praise alike and who claim My lotus feet as 
their only possession — such saintly souls are dear to Me as life and are veritable abodes 
of noble qualities and embodiments of bliss.” (38) 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 1013 
“Now hear the characteristics of the gnoble, association with whom should be 
scrupulously avoided; for their company ever brings woe, even as a wicked cow ruins by her 
company a cow of noble breed. The heart of the wicked suffers terrible agony; for they ever 
burn at the sight of others’ prosperity. Wherever they hear others reviled, they feel delighted 
as though they had stumbled upon a treasure lying on the road. Devoted to sensuality, 
anger, arrogance and greed, they are merciless, deceitful, crooked and impure. They bear 
enmity towards all without rhyme or reason; nay, they behave inimically even with those 
who are actively kind to them. They are false in their dealings (lying is their stock-in-trade); 
nay, falsehood is their dinner and falsehood their breakfast (whatever they eat is intended to 
deceive others). They speak honeyed words just like the peacock, that has a stony heart 
and devours the most venomous snake.” (1 — 4) 
 “Malevolent by nature, they enjoy others’ wives and others’ wealth and take delight 
in slandering others. Such vile and sinful men are eating demons in human garb. ”(39) 
1014 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Greed is their covering and greed their bedding (they wallow in greed; they are 
ever given up to sexual enjoyment and gluttony and have no fear of punishment in the 
abode of Yama (the god of death). If they ever hear anyone exalted, they heave a deep 
sigh as though they had an attack of ague. On the other hand, when they find anyone 
in distress, they rejoice as though they had attained the sovereignty of the whole world. 
Devoted to their own selfish interests, they antagonize their kinsfolk, are given up to 
sensuality and greed and are most irascible. They recognize neither mother nor father 
nor preceptor nor the Brahmanas; utterly ruined themselves, they bring ruin upon others. 
Overcome by infatuation they bear malice to others and have no love for communion with 
saints nor for the stories relating to Sri Hari. Oceans of vice, dull-witted and lascivious, 
they revile the Vedas and usurp others’ wealth. Though bearing malice to all, they are 
enemies of the Brahmanas in particular; and full of hypocrisy and deceit at heart, they 
outwardly wear a saintly appearance.” (1 — 4) 
 “Such vile and wicked men are absent in the Satya and Treta Yugas; a sprinkling of 
them will appear in Dvapara, while multitudes of them will crop forth in the Kali age.” (40) 

1015 
 “Brother, there is no virtue like benevolence, and no meanness like oppressing 
others. I have declared to you, dear brother, the verdict of all the Vedas and Puranas; 
the wise also know it. They who inflict pain on others even after attaining the human body 
have to suffer the terrible pangs of birth and death. Dominated by infatuation and devoted 
to their selfish interest men commit various sins and thereby ruin their prospects in the 
next world. Figuring as Yama (the god of death) for their sake, brother, I dispense the 
fruit of their good and evil actions. Realizing this, those who are supremely clever adore 
Me, knowing the cycle of births and deaths as full of pain. They renounce actions which 
yield good or evil results and take refuge in Me, the lord of gods, men and sages. Thus 
I have told you the characteristics of saints and vile men. They who have fully 
comprehended them are no more subjected to the process of transmigration. (1 — 4) 
 “Listen, dear brother: the numerous merits and demerits are all products of Maya. 
The greatest merit is that they should cease to exist in one’s eye; to discern them is 
ignorance.” (41) 
All the three brothers (Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna) rejoiced to hear these 
words from the blessed lips of the Lord and their heart overflowed with love. Again and 
again they showed Him profound reverence; there was immence joy in the heart of 


1016 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


Hanuman in particular. The Lord of the Raghus then retired to His own palace. In this 
way He enacted some new sport everyday. The sage Narada paid frequent visits and 
sang Sri Rama’s holy exploits. After witnessing fresh deeds everyday, the sage returned 
to Brahma’s abode and recited the whole story there. Viranci (the Creator) felt overjoyed 
to hear it and said, “Dear son, hymn His praises again and again.” Sanaka and his three 
brothers extolled Narada : and, though absorbed in Brahma (the Infinite), the sages forgot 
their Samadhi (absorption) on hearing the hymn of praise to the Lord and listened to it 
with reverence, supremely qualified as they were. (1 — 4) 

Even those (like Sanaka and others) who are liberated though embodied and are 
absorbed in Brahma hear the narrative of Sri Rama even by interrupting their meditation 
(abstraction). Truly theirs must be a heart of stone, who take no delight in the stories 
of Sri Hari. (42) 
Chapter 207
One day, invited by the Lord of the Raghus, the preceptor (Vasistha) and other 
leading Brahmanas and all the other citizens assembled (in the royal court). When the 
preceptor and the other sages and Brahmanas as well as all other gentlemen had taken 
their seats, the Lord who puts an end to the round of births of His devotees, addressed 
them in the following words: — “Listen to My words, citizens all: I am not going to say 
anything out of attachment for you in My heart; I do not ask you to do any thing wrong 
nor do I make use of My authority. Therefore, listen to Me and act accordingly if you 
please. He is My servant and he is dearest to Me, who obeys My command. If I say 
anything which is wrong, brethren, be not afraid to correct Me. It is by good fortune that 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1017 


you have secured a human body, which — as declared by all the scriptures — is difficult 
even for the gods to attain. It is a tabernacle suitable for spiritual endeavours, gateway 
to liberation. He who fails to earn a good destiny hereafter even on attaining it.” (1 — 4) 
 “He reaps torture in the other world and beats his head in remorse, wrongly 
attributing the blame to Time, Fate and God.” (43) 


“Sensuous enjoyment, brethren, is not the be-all and end-all of human existence; 
even heavenly enjoyment is short-lived and ends in sorrow. The fools who devote their 
mind to the pleasures of sense even after attaining human birth, take poison in 
exchange for nectar. None will ever speak well of him who picks up a peppercorn 
throwing away the philosopher’s stone. This immortal soul goes round through eighty- 
four lakh species of life, falling under four broad divisions. Driven by Maya (My 
deluding potency) and encompassed by Time, destiny, Nature and phenomenal 
existence, it ever drifts along. Rarely does God, who loves the Jiva without any self- 
interest, graciously bestow on it a human form, which is a veritable raft whereby it can 
cross the ocean of mundane existence, with My grace for a favourable wind and a 
worthy preceptor for a helmsman to steer this strong bark — a combination which, though 
difficult to secure, has been made easily available to it.” (1 — 4) 




1018 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “The man who, though equipped with all these resources, fails to cross the ocean of 
metempsychosis is ungrateful and dull-witted and meets the fate of a self-murderer.” (44) 

 “If you seek happiness here as well as hereafter, listen to My words and imprint 
them deeply in your heart. It is an easy and pleasant road, brethren, that of devotion to 
My feet, extolled in the Puranas and Vedas. Gnosis is difficult to attain and beset with 
numerous obstacles. The path is rugged and there is no solid ground for the mind to rest 
on. Scarcely one attains it after a hard struggle; yet, lacking in Devotion, the man fails to 
win My love. Devotion is independent and a mine of all blessings; men, however, cannot 
attain it except through the fellowship of saints. Saints for their part are inaccessible without 
a stock of merit; communion with the Lord’s devotees in any case brings to an end the 
cycle of births and deaths. There is only one meritorious act in this world and no other — 
to adore the feet of the Brahmanas by thought, word and deed. The sages and gods are 
propitious to him who guilelessly serves the twice-born (the Brahmanas).” (1 — 4) 
 “With joined palms I lay before you all, another secret doctrine: without adoring 
Sankara (Lord Siva) man cannot attain devotion to Me.” (45) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1019 
 “Tell Me what pains are involved in treading the path of Devotion : it requires 
neither Yoga (mind-control), nor sacrifices, nor Japa (muttering of prayers), nor penance, 
nor fasting. A guileless disposition, a mind free from perversity and absolute contentment 
with whatever may be got — this is all that is needed. If he who is called a devotee yet 
counts upon man, tell me, what faith does he have in Me? What use My dwelling on the 
subject further : I am won by the conduct of a man as depicted below, brethren. He who 
has no enmity or quarrel with anyone and is devoid of hope and fear — to such a man 
all the quarters are ever full of joy. Undertaking nothing (with an interested motive), 
without home, without pride and without sin, free from wrath, clever and wise, ever 
loving the company of saints and accounting the enjoyments even of heaven as well as 
final beatitude as no more than a blade of grass, tenaciously adhering to the cult of 
Devotion but avoiding bigotry, and giving up all sophistical reasoning: — (1 — 4) 
 “Fond of singing and hearing My praises and devoted to My Name, and free from 
attachment to the world, arrogance and infatuation — the felicity that such a man enjoys 
is known to him alone who has become one with God, the embodiment of supreme 
bliss.” (46) 

1020 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
On hearing Sri Rama’s nectar-like words all (who had assembled there) clasped 
the feet of the All-merciful. “Fountain of mercy ! You are our father and mother, preceptor 
and kinsman; You are dearer to us than our own life. Rama, You are our body, wealth 
and habitat and You are beneficent to us in everyway, relieving as You do the agony of 
the suppliant. None other than You could give such instruction; for even father and 
mother are devoted to their own interest. You two are the only disinterested benefactors 
in this world — Yourself and Your servant, O Destroyer of the demons. Everyone else in 
this world has his own interest to serve; no one thinks of others’ highest (spiritual) interests 
even in a dream, O Lord.” The Lord of the Raghus was delighted at heart to hear the 
words of all, steeped as those wrrds were in the nectar of love. On receiving the Lord’s 
permission they returned each to his own residence, repeating on the way the Lord’s 
charming discourse. (1 — 4) 

Uma, (continues Lord Siva,) the people of Ayodhya, both men and women, were 
the very picture of blessedness : for the Lord of the Raghus, who was none other than 
Brahma, the embodiment of truth, intelligence and bliss, ruled there as king. (47) 

1021 
One day the sage Vasistha called at the palace where the charming and all-blissful 
Sri Rama was. The Lord of the Raghus received him with great reverence, laved his feet 
and sipped the water into which the feet had been washed. “Listen, Rama said the sage 
with joined palms, “I make my humble submission, O Ocean of mercy. Even as I watch 
Your doings infinite bewilderment possesses my soul. Even the vedas do not know Your 
immeasurable greatness ; how can I describe it, O Almighty Lord? The vocation of a 
familypriest is very low : the Vedas, Puranas and the Srnrti texts equally denounce it. 
When I would not accept it, Brahma (my father) said to me, “It will redound to your benefit 
hereafter, my son : Brahma Itself, the Supreme Spirit, will appear in human semblance 
as a king, the ornament of Raghu’s race”. (1 — 4) 
 “Then I thought to myself, (through this very office) I shall attain to Him who is the 
object of Yogic practices, performance of sacrifices, religious vows and charity. Thus 
there can be no other vocation like this.” (48) 

1022 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


“Japa (muttering of prayers), austere penance, religious observances, Yogic 
practices, the performance of one’s allotted duties, the various pious acts recommended 
by the Vedas, the cultivation of spiritual enlightenment, compassion, self-control, bathing 
in sacred waters and whatever other sacred practices have been advocated by the 
Vedas and holy men and the recitation and hearing of various Tantra texts, Vedas and 
Puranas have only one reward, my lord; nay, all spiritual endeavours lead to the same 
glorious end, viz., unceasing devotion to Your lotus feet. Can dirt be removed by 
cleansing with dirt? Can anyone obtain butter by churning water? Even so, except by 
cleansing with the water of loving devotion, O Lord of the Raghus, the impurity 
accumulated within can never be washed away. He alone is all-wise, he the knower of 
Truth and he alone learned; he alone is an abode of virtues and possessed of 
uninterrupted and immediate perception; nay, he is clever and endowed with all auspicious 
attributes, who is devoted to Your lotus feet.” (1 — 4) 
 “My lord, I would ask one boon; grant it in Your mercy, Rama. May my love for 
Your lotus feet, O Lord, never flag in the course of all my future births.” (49) 
So saying, the sage Vasistha returned home. The All-merciful was highly pleased 
with him in His heart of hearts. Sri Rama, the delight of His servants, took with Him 
Hanuman as well as Bharata and His other two brothers (Laksmana and Satrughna) and 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 1023 

the benign Lord then went outside the city and ordered elephants, chariots and horses 
to be immediately brought before Him. Regarding them with kindness He praised them 
all and distributed them among the people giving each what one deserved and what one 
wished to have. The Lord, who is the reliever of all fatigue, Himself felt tired and retired 
to a cool mango grove, where Bharata spread his own scarf and the Lord took His seat 
thereon with all His brothers in attendance. The son of the wind-god now began to fan 
Him; he felt a thrill of joy all over his body and his eyes filled with tears. (Says Siva,) There 
is no one so blessed nor anyone so devoted to Sri Rama’s lotus feet as Hanuman, whose 
love and service, O daughter of the mountain-king have been repeatedly extolled by the 
Lord with His own mouth. (1 — 5) 
Chapter 208
At that time came Narada, lute in hand, began to sing Sri Rama’s sweet renown, 
which always has a fresh charm about it. (50) 

“Regard me, O lotus-eyed Lord, O Reliever of anxiety, with a benignant look. Dark of 
hue as the blue lotus, O Hari, You are as it were, a bee enjoying the honey of the lotus heart 
of Lord Siva (the Destroyer of Cupid), shattering the might of the demon hosts, You bring 
delight to saints and sages and wipe out sins. Beneficent to the Brahmanas as a mass of 
fresh clouds to a thirsty crop. You are the refuge of the helpless and the befriender of the 
afflicted. By the might of Your arm You have crushed Earth’s enormous burden and ingeniously 

1024 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
killed the demons Khara, Dusana and Viradha. Hail, all-blissful Slayer of Ravana, noblest of 
kings, a moon to the lily-like line of King Dasaratha. Your fair renown is familiar to the 
Puranas, Vedas and Tantras and is sung in the congregations of gods, sages and saints. 
Crushing false pride in Your mercy You are clever in everyway, O Jewel of the city of 
Ayodhya. Your very name wipes out the impurities of the Kali age and destroys worldly 
attachment. Pray, protect the suppliant, O lord of Tulasidasa.” (1 — 5) 

Having lovingly recounted Sri Rama’s catalogue of virtues, the sage Narada 
returned to Brahma’s abode, enshrining the Ocean of beauty in his heart. (51) 
Listen, Girija; (continues Lord Sankara,) “I have told you in full this holy narrative 
according to My own lights. The stories of Sri Rama are without number and beyond all 
dimensions. Not even the Vedas and Sarada (the goddess of speech) could recount 
them all. Infinite is Rama and infinite His excellences; His births, exploits and names too 
are endless. It may be possible to count the drops of water (in a shower of rain) or the 
grains of sand; but the exploits of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) cannot be 
recounted in full. This sacred story enables one to reach the abode of §ri Hari; whoever 
hears it, is blessed with unceasing devotion. Uma, (goes on Lord Siva,) I have repeated 
in full the delightful story which Bhusundi recited to the king of the birds. I have thus 
recounted a few of Sri Rama’s virtues; let me know, Bhavani (Parvati), what am I to tell 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 1025 
you next.” Uma was glad to have heard the blessed story and replied in exceedingly polite 
and soft accents : “I am highly blessed, O Slayer of the demon Tripura, to have heard 
Sri Rama’s praises, that take away the fear of birth and death.” (1 — 5) 
 “By Your grace, O Abode of mercy, I have now attained the object of my life and 
have no delusion left in me. I have realized the greatness of Lord Sri Rama, who is 
knowledge and bliss personified. O lord of resolute mind, my soul knows no satiety as 
I quaff with the cups of my ears the nectar-like story of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s 
line) flowing from Your moon-like mouth.” (52 A-B) 

Chapter 209
“They who feel satiated with hearing the exploits of Sri Rama have little known 
their peculiar sapor. Even those great sages who have attained final beatitude in their 
very lifetime constantly hear the praises of Sri Hari. To him who seeks to cross the 
ocean of worldly existence, the narrative of Sri Rama serves as a secure bark. Nay, the 
praises of Sri Hari are delightful to the ear and pleasing to the mind even of the sensualist. 
Is there in this world anyone with ears to hear, whom the exploits of Sri Rama (the Lord 
of the Raghus) do not delight. Stupid are those creatures and indeed killers of their soul, 

1026 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA

whom the narrative of Sri Rama does not attract.” While You sang what You have chosen 
to call, “the Manasa Lake of Sri Hari’s exploits” I listened, my lord, with boundless joy. 
You have just told me that this charming story was recited by Kakabhusundi to Garuda. 

(1-4) 
 “Bhusundi is staunch in his dispassion and steadfast in his wisdom and realization, 
and cherishes deep devotion to Sri Rama’s feet. That one possessing the form of a crow 
should be a devotee of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) fills me with great doubt.” (53) 
 “Listen, O Slayer of demon Tripura: among a thousand men there is scarce 
one who is steadfast in his vow of piety. Among ten million souls devoted to Dharme 
there may be one who is averse to the pleasures of sense and takes delight in dispassion. 
Among ten million souls free from worldly attachment, so declare the Vedas, scarce 
one succeeds in acquiring perfect wisdom. Among ten million enlightened souls in this 
world there is hardly one who attains final beatitude even when living. Among a thousand 
such souls he who has not only realized his oneness with Brahma but merged his identity 
in the Absolute and has accordingly become a fountain of all joy is rarely to be found. 
Of the religious, the unattached, the enlightened and the emancipated, as well as of 
those merged in the Absolute, O lord of divinities, he who takes delight in devotion 
to Sri Rama and is free from vanity and wiles is most difficult to find.” Kindly explain 
to me at length, O Lord of the universe, how such a devotion to Sri Hari was attained 
by a crow. (1 — 4) 

Chapter 210
 “Also tell me, my lord, how did Bhusundi obtain the form of a crow even though 
devoted to Sri Rama, steeped in wisdom, a home of virtues and resolute of mind?” (54) 
“Further tell me, O merciful lord, wherefrom did the crow get this sacred and 
delightful story? And also let me know how could You hear it, O Destroyer of Cupid: 
for all this fills me with much inquisitiveness. Garuda, again, is highly enlightened and an 
embodiment of virtues; moreover, he is a servant of Sri Hari (being His own mount) and 
lives very close to Him. Leaving a host of sages, wherefore did he approach a crow and 
hear Sri Rama’s story from him? Further let me know how the dialogue proceeded 
between the crow and Garuda (the devourer of serpents), both of whom are devotees 
of Sri Hari.” Lord Siva rejoiced to hear the artless and welcome speech of His Consort 
(Gauri) and politely replied, “You are blessed indeed, O virtuous lady; your idea is holy, 
and you possess not a little love for the feet of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). 
Therefore, listen to a most sacred story, which, when heard, puts an end to the delusion 
of the whole universe, engenders faith in Sri Rama’s feet and enables a man to cross 
the ocean of worldly existence without any difficulty.” (1 — 5) 

1028 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The king of the birds too went and put quite similar questions to the crow. I will 
reverently tell you all that: listen, Uma with an attentive mind. (55) 
Listen, O charming and bright-eyed lady, to the circumstances in which I heard this 
story, that delivers one from the cycle of births and deaths. You first took birth in the house 
of Daksa and Sati was the name you then bore. At Daksa’s sacrifice you were subjected to 
contumely and in the heat of your indignation you gave up your life then. My servants 
wrecked the sacrifice : you know the whole episode already. I felt much troubled at heart 
thereafter; for your loss had left me disconsolate, my dear. I wandered among beautiful 
woodlands, mountains, rivers and tanks seeing sights, but found no charm anywhere. In 
the far north, even beyond Mount Sumeru, there stands a most lovely mountain, known by 
the name of Nilagiri (the Blue Mountain). It has four charming and delightful gold peaks, 
which gladdened my soul : on each stood one gigantic tree, a banyan, a Peepul (the sacred 
bo-tree), a Plaksa (the Indian fig tree) and a mango. On the top of the mountain sparkled a 
beautiful tarn with jewelled steps, which were so enchanting to behold. (1 — 5) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 1029 


Its water was cool, limpid and sweet; its lotuses abundant and many coloured. Flocks 
of swans murmured their sweet notes and the bees made a delightful buzzing. (56) 
On that splendid mountain dwells the same bird (Kakabhusundi), that outlives 
even the end of the world. The various good and evil phenomena created by Maya (the 
Cosmic Illusion), and ignorance in its varied forms such as infatuation, lust etc., which 
hold sway all over the universe, never touch the precincts of that mountain. Now hear, 
Lima, with tender affection how the crow spends his days there in adoring Sri Hari. Under 
the Peepul tree he practises meditation; he performs secrifice in the form of Japa 
(muttering of prayers) under the Plaksa; in the shade of the mango tree he offers mental 
worship to the Lord, having no occupation other than adoring 6rl Hari; and under the 
banyan he narrates episodes from the story of Sri Hari, to hear which many a bird flocks 
there. With loving reverence he sings the various marvellous exploits of §ri Rama; the 
swans of pure mind, that ever dwell in that lake, all listen to the story. When I arrived 
there and saw the spectacle, an intense joy welled up in my heart. (1 — 5) 
Then, assuming the form of a swan, I sojourned there for some length of time. And, 
after reverently listening to the praises of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), I returned 
to Kailasa. (57) 

1030 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Girija, I have thus narrated the whole episode as to when I visited the bird 
(Kakabhusundi). Now hear the circumstances under which Garuda (the glory of the 
feathered kingdom) called on the crow. When the Lord of the Raghus enacted the sport 
of a combat (with Meghanada, Ravana’s son) — the very thought of which fills me with 
shame — and allowed Himself to be bound by Meghanada (the conqueror of Indra), the 
sage Narada despatched Garuda. When Garuda (the devourer of serpents) had cut the 
bonds and departed, a terrible dejection possessed his soul. Racalling the Lord’s 
bondage, the enemy of the serpents thought over the incident in many ways : “It was the 
all-pervading and passionless Brahma, the lord of speech, the supreme Ruler beyond 
Maya and error, who had, I was told, taken descent in this world. But I saw none of His 
divine glory. (1 — 4) 
 “The same Rama, by repeating whose Name men get freedom from the bonds of 
worldly existence was tied down by a puny demon with coils of snakes !” (58) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 1031 
Garuda did all he could to reassure himself; but the light of wisdom did not dawn 
on him; on the other hand, error overshadowed his soul all the more. Torn by torments 
and full of mental questionings, he fell a prey to delusion just like yourself. In his perplexity 
he approached the celestial sage (Narada) and apprized him of the doubt that preyed 
upon his mind. On hearing his tale Narada was moved with great compassion and 
said, “Listen, Garuda: formidable is Sri Rama’s Maya (delusive power); it robs even 
the wise of their sense and bringing them under its sway, clouds their mind with utter 
infatuation. The same Maya that befooled me many a time, has laid its hold on you, 
O lord of the feathered creation. A blinding infatuation has taken root in your heart and 
it will not be readily eradicated by any words of mine. Therefore, betake yourself to 
Brahma (the four-faced Creator), O lord of the winged creatures, and do whatever he 
enjoins you.” (1 — 4) 
So saying the most enlightened celestial sage went his way, chanting Sri Rama’s 
praises and repeatedly recalling the power of Sri Hari’s Maya. (59) 
1032 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


The lord of the feathered creation then went to the Creator and told him his doubt. 
On hearing his story Brahma bowed his head to Sri Rama and, realizing His might, was 
overwhelmed with love. The Creator mused within himself : “The seers and sages as 
well as the learned are all dominated by Maya. Unbounded is the power of Sri Hari’s 
Maya, that has often made a puppet of me. The whole of this animate and inanimate 
creation was evolved by me; no wonder, then, that the king of the birds has been 
beguiled by it.” Thereupon Brahma said in charming accents, “The great Lord Siva is 
conversant with Sri Rama’s glory. Therefore, O son of Vinata, approach Lord Sankara 
and ask no question of anyone elsewhere, dear child. There alone will your doubts be 
resolved.” On hearing the Creator’s advice the bird flew away. (1 — 4) 
Then came the lord of the feathered kingdom in utmost distress to me. At that time I 
was on my way to Kubera’s residence; while you, Uma, were here on Mount Kailasa.(60) 
He reverently bowed his head at my feet and then placed his doubt before me. On 
hearing his submission, which was couched in polite terms, Bhavani, I lovingly replied to 
him, “Garuda, you have met me on the way; how then, shall I instruct you? Doubts are 
wholly resolved only when one enjoys the fellowship of saints for a long time, and listens 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 1033 

there to the delightful story of Sri Hari, that has been sung by the sages in diverse ways 
and the sole theme of which — at the beginning, in the middle as well as at the end — is the 
divine Lord Sri Rama. I shall accordingly send you to a place where, O brother, the story 
of Sri Hari is recited everyday; you go there and listen. As you hear it, all your doubts will 
vanish and you will develop intense love for Sri Rama’s feet.” (1 — 4) 

Except in the company of saints one cannot get on opourtee=nitue to attend holy 
dis corse on Sri Hari, and one cannot be rid of error except through such talk. And till 
one’s error is dispersed one cannot have deep-rooted affection for Sri Rama’s feet. (61) 

The Lord of the Raghus cannot be found except through love, even though you 
may practise Yoga (mind-control) or austere penance or culivate spiritual wisdom or 
dispassion. In the north there is a beautiful blue mountain called Nilagiri, where lives 
the amiable Kakabhusundi, highly conversant with the path of Devotion to Sri Rama, 
enlightened, full of all good qualities and ages old. He unceasingly recites Sri Rama’s 
narrative and noble birds of different species reverently listen to it. Go there and 
hear of the many virtues of Sri Hari; your distress born of infatuation will thus disappear.” 
When I had thus told him everything onplained, Garuda bowed his head at my feet and 




1034 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


departed with joy. Uma, I did not instruct him myself, because by the grace of Sri Rama 
(the Lord of the Raghus) I had come to know the secret (of Garuda’s infatuation). He must 
have given vent to his pride on some ocassion and the All-merciful evidently wished to 
cure him of it. Partly there was another reason why I did not detain him; a bird can follow 
the language of a bird alone. My lord’s Maya, Bhavani, is formidable; who is there so wise 
as not to be beguiled by it?” (1 — 5) 
Even Garuda, the very crest-jewel of devotees and enlightened souls and the 
mount of Lord Visnu (the sovereign of the three spheres), was deluded by Maya how 
absurd, then, the poor mortals vaunt their immunity from it. (62 A) 
The Lord’s Maya beguiles even Siva and Brahma; of what account is any poor 
creature? Bearing this in mind, the sages adore the divine Lord of Maya. (62 B) 
Garuda went to the abode of Bhusundi (Kakabhusundi) of unhampered intellect and 
* UTTARA-KANDA * 1035 

possessing uninterrupted devotion to Sri Hari. At the sight of the mountain his heart 
rejoiced and he was rid of all Maya (delusion), infatuation and anxiety. After bathing in 
the tarn and drinking of its water he betook himself under the banyan tree, delighted at 
heart. Aged birds of all kinds flocked there to hear Sri Rama’s charming exploits. 
Bhusundi was just on the point of commencing the narration when the king of the 
birds arrived. All inclusive of Kakabhusundi feel happy to see Garuda coming. Bhusundi 
received the king of the birds with the utmost reverence and, having enquired after his 
welfare, conducted him to an exalted seat. After offering him loving worship the crow 
addressed him in honeyed accents: — (1 — 4) 


“My lord, I have been blessed by your sight; now let me do whatever you bid me, O 
king of the birds. With what object have you come, my master ?” “You have always been a 
picture of blessedness,” replied the lord of the feathered kingdom in gentle phrase, “as I find 
that the great Lord Siva reverently extolled you with His own mouth.” (63 A-B) 

1036 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Listen, dear one : the object for which I came has already been fully accomplished 
and I have also had the privilege of seeing you. At the very sight of your most holy hermitage 
my infatuation, doubt and many misconceptions have been removed. Now, dear one, 
narrate to me with due reverence the most sacred story of Sri Rama, which is ever delightful 
and a cure for all sufferings. This is what I beg of you again and again.” The moment 
Bhusundi heard Garuda’s reqaest, humble, sincere, loving; delightful and pious, a supreme 
joy diffused over his soul and he commenced recounting the virtues of Sri Rama (the Lord 
of the Raghus). First of all, with fervent devotion, O Bhavani, he gave an elaborate 
description of the lake of Sri Rama’s exploits. Next he told about Narada’s terrible infatuation 
and then of Ravana’s incarnation. Thereafter he sang the story of the Lord’s descent and 
then recounted with deep interest His childlike sports. (1 — 5) 

After narrating His boyish sports of various kinds with the utmost rapture of soul 


he told of the sage’s (Visvamitra’s) arriva and thereafter of Sri Rama’s wedding. (64) 
Then he narrated the episode of Sri Rama’s projected installaion (as the Prince- 
Regent of Ayodhya) and after that he spoke of the sudden interruption in the festivities 
connected with the installation due to King Dasaratha’s solemn pledge (to Kaikeyi), as well 
as of the citizens’ agony at Rama’s parting. He then reproduced the dialogue between 
Sri Rama and Laksmana and further described their journey to the forest, the devotion of 
the boatman and their ferrying across the celestial stream (Gariga) and halt at Prayaga. 
He further described the Lord’s meeting with the sage Vaimiki and how the divine Sri Rama 
sojourned at Citrakuta. Again, he then told of the minister’s (Sumantra’s) return to the 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 1037 

capital, the King’s demise, Bharata’s coming back (from his maternal grandfather’s) as well 
as his abundant love (for Sri Rama). He further related how after performing the King’s 
obsequies Bharata with all the citizens betook himself to where the All-blissful Lord was, 
and how when the Lord of the Raghus consoled him in every way he took the Lord’s 
sandals and returned to the city of Ayodhya. Bhusundi continued and described Bharata’s 
mode of life (at Nandigrama), the (mischievous) conduct of Jayanta (the son of Indra, the 
lord of the celestials) and the Lord’s meeting with the sage Atri. (1 — 4) 
After giving an account of Viradha’s death (at the hands of the Lord) he told how 
the sage Sarabhanga dropped his body, and further described Sutiksna’s devotion and 
also the Lord’s holy communion with the sage Agastya. (65) 
After speaking about the purification of the Dandaka forest Bhusundi told of the 
Lord’s friendship with the vulture king (Jatayu). He further narrated how the Lord took up 
His abode at Pancavati and dissipated the fears of all the hermits. Then came the Lord’s 
incomparable exhortation to Laksmana and the story of Surpanakha’s mutilation. He 
further narrated the death of Khara and Dusana (at the Lord’s hands) and how Ravana 
(the ten-headed monster) got all the information. Again, he then told all the particulars of 
the latter’s talk with Marlca. Thereafter he described the abduction of the illusory Slta and 
briefly referred to the desolation of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line). After this he told 
how the Lord performed the Obsequies of the vulture king, slew the demon Kabandha 
and bestowed the highest state (final beatitude) on Sabari (the Bhila woman), and further 
narrated how the Hero of Raghu’s line went to the bank of the Pampa lake, bewailing His 
desolation all the way. (1 — 4) 

1038 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

After repeating the Lord’s talk with the sage Narada as well as the episode of His 
meeting with the son of the wind-good, Bhusundi told of Sri Rama’s alliance with Sugriva 
and of Vali’s death at His hands. He further related how after installing Sugriva (on the 
throne of Kiskindha) the Lord took up His abode on Mount Pravarsana, gave an account 
of the rains as well as of the autumn that immediately followed and told of Sri Rama’s 
wrath on Sugriva and the latter’s dismay. (66 A-B) 
The crow further narrated how Sugriva (the lord of the monkeys) sent out monkeys, 
who rushed forth in every direction in quest of Sita; how the party sent to the south entered 
a cave and were met later on by Sampati (Jatayu’s elder brother); how after hearing all the 
news from him the son of the wind-god jumped over the vast ocean, how the monkey chief 
made his way into Lanka and how later on he saw and reassured Sita; how after laying 
waste the grove (where Sita had been lodged) and exhorting Ravana he set fire to his 
capital and leapt back across the sea; how the whole party of the monkeys rejoined the 
Lord of the Raghus and told Him of Sita’s welfare and how the Hero of Raghu’s line with His 
army went and encamped on the seashore and how Vibhisana came and saw Him; and 
further recited the story of the ocean’s subjugation. (1 — 4) 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 1039 

Bhusundi then narrated how after building a bridge across the ocean the monkey 
host crossed over to the other side and how the most heroic son of Vaii went as an 
envoy to Ravana. He further described the conflict between the demons and the 
monkeys in all its phases, and in course of it the might and valour, and eventually the 
destruction, of Kumbhakarna and Meghanada. (67 A-B) 
The crow then told about the extermination of the demon host and the various phases 
of the combat between the Lord of the Raghus and Ravana, Ravana’s death and MandodarT’s 
lament, the enthronement of Vibhisana, the cessation of the gods’ sorrow and Sita’s reunion 
with the Lord of the Raghus. He further narrated how the gods with joined palms hymned 
the Lord’s praises, how the All-merciful Lord then mounted the aerial car known by the 
name of Puspaka alongwith the monkeys and flew to Ayodhya and how Sri Rama arrived 
at His own capital and all such holy doings. He then told of Sri Rama’s coronation and also 
described the city and all its kingly polity. In this way Bhusundi narrated the whole story as 
I have already told you, Bhavani. When he heard the whole of Sri Rama’s narrative, Garuda’s 
mind was filled with rapture and he spoke the (of the lord) thus: — (1 — 4) 




1040 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “My doubts have gone, now that I have heard the whole of Sri Rama’s narrative. 
And by your grace, O best of crows, I have developed devotion to Sri Rama’s feet. A 
mighty bewilderment possessed me when I saw the Lord bound in battle : Sri Rama is 
Knowledge and Bliss personified; for what reason can he be perturbed?” (68 A-B) 
 “As I found His ways so closely resembling those of a human being, a grievous 
doubt arose in my soul. Now I regard that error of mine as a blessing and feel that the 
All-merciful bestowed a favour on me (in the form of that error). For he alone who is 
terribly oppressed with the heat of the sun can appreciate the blessing of an umbrageous 
tree. Had I not thus fallen a prey to gross infatuation, how could it have been possible 
for me to meet you, revered sir, and how could I get an opportunity to hear the charming 
and most wonderful story of Sri Hari that you have just sung in all its details. The Vedas, 
the Tantras and the Puranas are one on this point and so declare the Siddhas and sages 
in unequivocal terms that the fellowship of genuine saints is only attained by those whom 
Sri Rama regards with favour. By Sri Rama’s grace I have been blessed with your sight 
and by your blessing, again, all my doubts have disappeared.” (1 — 4) 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1041 
On hearing Garuda’s speech, so modest and affectionate, the crow was greatly 
rejoiced at heart; every hair on his body stood erect and tears rushed to his eyes. Lima, 
(continues Lord Siva,) saints reveal their profoundest secrets when they find a listener 
who is not only intelligent, virtuous and pious, but fond of Sri Rama’s story and a devotee 

Then answered Kakabhusundi, who had no small affection for the lord of the 
feathered creation : “My lord, you are in everyway entitled to my homage, a recipient as 
you are of Sri Rama’s favour. You had neither doubt nor infatuation, nor delusion; it was 
only an excuse, my lord, for doing me a kindness. By sending you, O king of the birds, 
under the pretext of infatuation the Lord of the Raghus has conferred an honour on me. 
Yet, my lord, there is nothing peculiar in that delusion of yours of which you have told 
me, O king of the birds; for the celestial sage Narada, Bhava (Lord Siva) and Viranci (the 
Creator), as well as Sanaka and the other great sages, exponents of the truth of the 
Spirit — which of these has not been blinded by infatuation? Again, is there anyone in this 
world whom lust has not made a puppet of? Who has not been maddened by the thirst 
for enjoyment and whose heart has not been inflamed by anger? (1 — 4) 




1042 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Is there any sage, ascetic, hero, seer, man of learning or man of virtue in this 
world, whom greed has not betrayed? Again, whom has the pride of pelf not perverted? 
Who has not been deafened by power? And is there anyone who has not been smitten 
by the shaft-like glances of a fawn-eyed woman? (70 A-B) 
Who is not thrown out of his mental equipoise by the combined action of the three 
Gunas (modes of Prakrti) as by the synchronous derangement of the three humours of 
the body (which generally proves fatal to the victim according to the principles of 
Ayurveda)? None has escaped the stings of pride and arrogance. Who does not get 
wildly excited under an attack of fever in the form of youth and whose good reputation 
is not marred by worldly attachment? Who does not incur obloquy through envy and who 
is not shaken by the blast of grief? Who is not bitten by the serpent of care? And is there 
anyone in this world who is not overcome by Maya (the delusive potency of God)? 
Again, is there anyone so resolute of mind, whose body is not being consumed by desire 
as a piece of wood is eaten away by a wooded-borer? Whose mind has not been 
polluted by the threefold desire — the desire of progeny, the desire of wealth and the 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 1043 


desire of fame? All these constitute the retinue of Maya, formidable and infinite in number, 
more than any can tell. Even Lord Siva and the four-faced Brahma (the Creator) are ever 
afraid of these; of what account, then, are other creatures? (1 — 4) 
Maya’s formidable army is spread over the whole universe. Concupiscence and 
others (viz., Anger and Greed) are its generals; Hypocrisy, Deceit and Heresy its 
champions. That Maya, however, is Sri Rama’s own handmaid; though unreal when 
understood, there is no release from her grip except by Sri Rama’s grace: I declare this 
with the utmost confidence. (71 A-B) 

The same Maya that has made a puppet of the whole world and whose ways are 
unknown to anyone, dences with all her party like an actress on the stage to the play 
of the Lord’s eyebrows, O king of birds. Such is Sri Rama, who is devoid of birth, the 
totality of Existence, Knowledge and Bliss, wisdom personified, the home of beauty and 
strength. He is both pervading and pervaded, fractionless, infinite and integral, the Lord 
of unfailing power, attributeless, vast, transcending speech as well as the other senses, 
all-seeing, free from blemish, invincible, unattached, devoid of form, free from error, 




1044 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


eternal and untainted by Maya, beyond the realm of Prakrti (Matter), bliss personified, the 
Lord indwelling the heart of all, the actionless Brahma, free from passion and imperishable. 
In Him error finds no ground to stand upon; can the shades of darkness ever approach 
the sun? (1 — 4) 
For the sake of His devotees, the divine Lord Sri Rama took the form of an earthly 
sovereign and performed most sacred deeds, in the manner of an ordinary mortal, even 
as an actor, while acting on the stage, assumes various guises and exhibits different 
characters but himself dose not became that. (72 A-B) 
Such, O enemy of serpents, is the pastime of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), 
a bewilderment to the demons but a delight to His servants. Those who are impure of 
mind, given over to the pleasures of sense and slaves of passion, attribute infatuation to 
the Lord in the following manner, my master. He who has a jaundiced eye declares the 
moon as of a yellow colour so long as the disease is there. When a man is bewildered 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 1045 

as to the point of the compass, O Garuda, he affirms that the sun has risen in the west. 
A man who is sailing on a boat finds the world moving and deludes himself with the idea 
that he himself is standing still. Children whirl round in play, but not the surrounding 
buildings etc., yet they dub one another a liar (when some of them insist that it is they 
themselves who are moving). It is in this way, O king of the birds, that error is ascribed 
to Sri Hari; otherwise not even in a dream is He subject to delusion. Those dull-witted 
wretches who are dominated by Maya and who have many a veil hanging over their soul, 
such fools alone raise doubts in their perversity and ascribe their own ignorance to Sri 
Rama. (1 — 5) 

Steeped in lust, anger, arrogance and greed and attached to their home, which is 
fuee miserie of woe, how can such dullards know the Lord of the Raghus, fallen as they 
are in the depths of darkness (ignorance)? The attributeless aspect of the Godhead is 
easy to understand; but no one can comprehend the embodied form (which is beyond all 
modes of Prakrti and divine in character). Even a sage’s soul is bewildered on hearing of 
the various exploits of the Lord, both of an intelligible and baffling character. (73 A-B) 

1046 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


“Hear, O lord of the feathered kingdom, of the greatness of Sri Rama (the Lord of 
the Raghus). I recite to you according to the best of my lights a delightful story in this 
connection. I shall also narrate to you the whole story as to how I fell a prey to delusion, 
my lord. You, dear Garuda, are a favourite of Sri Rama and fond of hearing Sri Hari’s 
praises and a source of delight to me. I am, therefore, concealing nothing from you and 
tell you a profound and charming secret. Hear of Sri Rama’s innate disposition: He never 
tolerates pride in His people. For pride is the root of metempsychosis and the cause of 
all kinds of pain and every form of grief. Hence the All-merciful gets rid of it in His 
extreme fondness for His servants, even as when a boil appears on the body of a child, 
my lord, the mother gets it opened like one having a stony heart.” (1 — 4) 
Although at first (while the boil is being cut open) the child experiences pain 
and cries helplessly the mother minds not the child’s agony, in her anxiety to see 
the child cured. Even so, in the interest of the devotee himself, the Lord of the Raghus 
takes away his pride. Forswearing all error, Tulasidasa, why should you not adore 
such a lord as this? (74 A-B) 
Now, O lord of the feathered kingdom, I tell you of Sri Rama’s benignity and my own 
opacity; listen attentively. Whenever Sri Rama appears in human semblance and enacts 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 1047 


numberless sports for the sake of His devotees I betake myself to the city of Ayodhya and 
delight to watch His childish exploits. I go and witness the grand festival of His birth and, 
fascinated (by the charm of His childish sports), stay on there for full five years. The child 
Rama is my beloved deity, who sums up in His person the charm of countless Cupids. 
Ever gazing on the countenance of my lord, I allow my eyes to enjoy the fruit of their existence, 
O enemy of serpents. Assuming the form of a small crow and remaining in the company of 
Sri Hari I witness His childish exploits of all kinds. (1 — 4) 
 “Wherever He moves about as a child I flutter about close to Him. And the crumbs 
that fall from His mouth in the courtyard I pick up and eat. In one particular cycle the Hero 
of Raghu’s line performed all His exploits in an extreme degree.” The moment Kakabhusundi 
recalled those exploits every hair on his body stood erect. (75 A-B) 

Continued Bhusundi : “Listen, O chief of the birds; the story of Sri Rama is the 
delight of His servants. The king’s palace (at Ayodhya) was beautiful in everyway; it was 
all of gold studded with precious stones of various kinds. The courtyard, where the four 
brothers played everyday, was magnificent beyond description. The Lord of the Raghus 


1048 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
frolicked about in this yard carrying on childish pastimes that were the delight of His 
mother. His tender frame was dark of hue with a greenish tinge resembling that of the 
emerald; every limb of it had the loveliness of numberless Cupids compressed into it. His 
feet were soft and ruddy like a young lotus, with bright toes and nails that outshone the 
brilliance of the moon. They had soles bearing the fourfold lovely marks of the 
thunderbolt, the elephant-goad, the flag and the lotus, and were adorned with beautiful 
anklets that sweetly jingled. The charming zone about His waist, which was made of gold 
bossed with jewels produced a pleasant tinkling sound. (1 — 4) 

The belly contained three lovely creases with a charming deep navel. The broad 
chest gleamed with jewels and raiment of various kinds, all befitting a child. (76) 
His roseate hands, nails and fingers were all captivating; His long arms were richly 
adorned. He had shoulders resembling those of a lion’s cub and a neck shaped like a 
conch, a lovely chin and a face which was the very perfection of beauty. His speech was 
yet indistinct, His lips rosy and His mouth contained a pair of small pearly and shapely teeth 
both above and below. He had lovely cheeks, a charming nose and a smile which afforded 
delight and was bright as the rays of the moon. His eyes, which resembled a pair of blue 
* UTTARA-KANDA * 1049 

lotuses, undid the bonds of worldly existence; while His forehead gleamed with a sacred 
mark made with yellow pigment. He had arched eyebrows, pretty well-matched ears and 
curly darkblue hair that scattered their charm all round. A thin yellow garment set off His 
swarthy person, and His shrill gleeful cry and glance captivated me. Thus frolicking in the 
courtyard of the royal palace, the All-beautiful danced at the sight of His own shadow and 
played with me in diverse ways, which I blush to tell you. Crying with joy as He ran to catch 
hold of me, I flew away; then He showed me a piece of sweet cake. (1 — 5) 

As I went near Him the lord smiled; but the moment I flew away He fell acrying. 
And when I approached Him to lay hold of His feet He scampered off, turning round again 
and again to look at me. Seeing Him play like an ordinary child I was overcome by 
bewilderment : “What ! are these actions in anyway worthy of Him who is knowledge and 
bliss personified?” (77 A-B) 
The moment I allowed this doubt to enter my mind, O king of the birds, Sri Rama’s 
Maya (delusive power) took possession of me as directed by the Lord of the Raghus. 
That Maya, however, did not prove to be a source of trouble to me, nor did it throw me 




1050 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


into the whirlpool of birth and death as it does in the case of other creatures. This, my 
lord, was attributable to some extraordinary reason. Hear it attentively, O mount of Sri 
Hari, Sita’s Spouse alone is absolute intelligence; every creature, whether animate or 
inanimate, is subject to Maya. If all had the same perfect wisdom, tell me, what would be 
the difference between God and the Jiva (the individual soul)? The latter, which identifies 
itself with a particular psycho-physical organism, is subject to Maya; while Maya itself, 
the source of the three Gunas, is controlled by God. The Jiva is dependent (subject to 
Maya), while God is self-dependent. The Jivas are many, while the Beloved of Laksmi is 
one (without a second). Even though this difference, which has been created by Maya, is 
false, it cannot disappear except by Sri Hari’s grace, whatever you may do. (1 — 4) 
The man who seeks to attain the state of eternal bliss without adoring 
Sri Ramacandra is a beast without tail and horns, however wise he may be. Even though 
the moon rose complete in all her sixteen digits with the entire starry host, and even if all the 
mountains were set on fire, night would not disappear without the sun. (78 A-B) 
In like manner, O lord of the feathered race mortals cannot be rid of their suffering 
without adoring Sri Hari. Avidya (Nescience) has no power over a servant of Sri Hari; it is 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1051 


Vidya (knowledge of Brahma in Its relative aspect) that holds away over him as directed by 
the Lord. That is why a servant of the Lord never falls; on the other hand, O best of birds, 
his devotion to the Lord as apart from himself grows. Sri Rama smiled to see me bewildered 
with error : now hear further particulars in this connection. The secret of this diversion 
nobody came to know, neither His younger brothers nor His parents. The Lord with a swarthy 
form and rosy hands and feet crawled on His hands and knees in order to catch me. Thereupon, 
O enemy of serpents, I took to flight. Sri Rama stretched out His arm to lay hold on me. 
Away as I flew into the air I saw Sri Hari’s arm close to me everywhere. (1 — 4) 
I flew up to Brahma’s abode; but when I looked back in my flight, two fingers’ 
breadth, dear Garuda, was all the distance between Sri Rama’s arm and myself. 
Penetrating the seven folds of the universe (consisting of earth, water, fire, air, ether, the 
cosmic ego and the cosmic intellect) I mounted to the utmost height I could reach. But there too I saw the Lord’s arm; then I felt distrese. (79 A-B) 
In my terror I closed my eyes; and when I opened them again I found myself at 
Kosalapura (Ayodhya). Sri Rama smiled to see me back; and even as He laughed I was 




1052 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


instantly driven into His mouth (throat). Listen, king of the birds: inside His belly I beheld 
multitudinous universes with many strange spheres each more wonderful than the rest, 
with myriads of Brahmas and Sivas, countless stars, suns and moons, numberless 
Lokapalas (guardians of spheres), Yamas (gods of punishment) and Kalas (gods of 
death), innumerable mountains and vast terrestrial globes, oceans, rivers, lakes and 
forests without end and manifold other varieties of creation, with gods and sages, the 
Siddhas, Nagas, human beings and Kinnaras and the four classes of living beings, both 
moving and motionless. (1 — 4) 

I saw there all such marvels as I had never seen or heard of before and such as 
could not be conceived even by the mind; how, then, can I describe them? I stayed a 
full hundred year in each of those universes and in this manner I went round and beheld 
multitudinous universes having the shape of an egg. (80A-B) 
Each universe had its own Brahma (Creator), its own Visnu (Preserver), Siva 
(Destroyer), Manu (lord of creation presiding over a single Manvantara, consisting of a 
little more than 74 rounds of the four Yugas), regents of the quarters, human beings, 
* UTTARA-KANDA * 1053 

Gandharvas (celestial musicians), spectres and goblins, Kimnaras (another class of 
heavenly musicians having a human figure with the head of a horse), Raksasas (giants), 
quadrupeds, birds, serpents, gods and demons of all classes, all the creatures having 
a shape peculiar to that universe. The earth with its multitudinous rivers, oceans, lakes 
and mountains, nay, the entire creation in each universe had a distinctive character. In 
all these universes I saw myself in every unevese and also I saw in nembable thip all 
eeniqne bi . Each universe had its own Ayodhya with its own Sarayu and its own men 
and women. And listen, dear Garuda : Sri Rama’s parents — Dasaratha and Kausalya — 
as well as Sri Rama’s brothers, Bharata and others, were all different in each universe. 
In each such universe I witnessed the descent of Sri Rama as well as the infinite variety 
of His childish sports. (1 — 4) 

Everything I saw had a distinctive stamp of its own universe and was exceedingly 
wonderful too, O mount of Sri Hari. But in my round of the innumerable universes I saw 
no other Rama, my lord. Tossed by the blast of infatuation I saw, in each successive 
world that I visited, the same child-like ways, the same beauty, the same gracious Rama 
(Hero of Raghu’s line). (81 A-B) 

1054 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
It seemed as if a hundred cycles had been spent in my wanderings through the 
many universes. At last after all my travels I came to my own hermitage and stayed there 
for sometime. Meanwhile as I happened to hear of my lord’s birth at Ayodhya I started 
up and ran in an overwhelming ecstasy of love and went and witnessed the grand 
festival of His birth as I have already told you at length. (It need hardly be said that all 
this happened inside the belly of my lord.) Thus in the belly of Sri Rama I beheld a 
number of universes. But what I saw could only be seen with one’s eyes: it was beyond 
all telling. There again I beheld the divine Sri Rama, the gracious and all-wise Lord of 
Maya. I pondered again and again. But my understanding was obscured by the mists 
of delusion. In less than an hour I had seen everything. My soul being utterly bewildered, 
I was lost in a maze. (1 — 4) 

Seeing my distress the gracious Hero of Raghu’s line laughed; and mark me, O 
Garuda of resolute mind; the moment He laughed I came out of His mouth. Sri Rama 
again began the same childish pranks with me. I reasoned with myself in everyway I 
could; but my mind knew no peace. (82 A-B) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1055 
Seeing this childish play and recalling that glory (which I had seen inside the Lord’s 
belly) I lost consciousness of my body, and crying : “Save me, save me, O Protector of 
the devotees in distress !” dropped to the ground. No other word came to my mouth. When 
the Lord saw me overpowered with love, He immediately checked the power of His Maya. 
The Lord, who is so merciful to the afflicted, placed His lotus hand on my head and 
relieved me of all sorrow. The gracious Sri Rama, the delight of His servants, rid me of 
my deep-rooted error. As I reflected on His former glory my mind was flooded with joy. 
Seeing the Lord’s loving kindness to His devotees my heart began to throb with profuse 
love. With eyes full of tears and joined palms and every hair on my body standing erect, 
I then made supplication to Him in many ways. (1 — 4) 

Hearing my loving words and seeing the wretched plight of His servant, Sri Rama 
(the Abode of Laksmi) spoke in words which were not only soft and pleasing but 
profound at the same time; “Kakabhusundi ! ask of Me a boon, knowing Me to be highly 
pleased with you. Be it mystic powers such as Anima (the power of assuming a 
form as small as an atom), fabulous wealth and final beatitude, which is the fountain of 
all joy”:— (83 A-B) 
1056 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
— Or spiritual wisdom, critical judgment, dispassion, realization and numerous other 
virtues which cannot be easily attained in this world even by the sages — today I am 
prepared to give you all thise is no roore tavanly in undoubtedly; therefore, ask whatever 
pleases your mind. On hearing the words of the Lord I was overwhelmed with love and 
began to reason thus within myself : “The Lord, it is true, has promised to give me all kinds 
of blessings; but He did not offer to grant me devotion to His own feet. Without such 
devotion all sorts of virtues and blessings are like so many auxiliary dishes without salt. 
Of what avail is any blessing without adoration.” Pondering thus, O king of the birds, I 
replied as follows : “If it is Your pleasure, my lord, to grant me a boon and if You are kind 
and affectionate to me, I ask my cherished boon, O master; for You are generous and 
know the secrets of all hearts.” (1 — 4) 

 “O my lord, Sri Rama, tree of paradise to the devotee, friend of the suppliant, 
ocean of compassion and abode of bliss, in Your mercy grant me that devotion to Your 
feet, uninterrupted, and unalloyed, which the Vedas and Puranas extol, which is sought 
after by Sages and great Yogis (contemplative mystics) but attained by few and that too 
by the Lord’s grace.” (84A-B) 

1057 


bhagati gyana bigyana biraga, joga caritra rahasya bibhaga. 
janaba tat sabahl kara bheda, mama prasada nahf sadhana kheda.4. 

“So be it !” said the Chief of Raghu’s line, and continued in these most pleasing 
terms : “Listen, Kakabhusundi : you are sagacious by nature; no wonder, therefore, that 
you ask this boon. No one in this world is so highly blessed as you, since you have 
sought the gift of Devotion, which is the fountain of all blessings and which even sages 
cannot attain in spite of all their efforts, even though they consume their body in the fire 
of japa and yoga. I am pleased to see your sagacity in that you have sought Devotion, 
which is extremely dear to My heart. Listen, O bird : by My grace now all good qualities 
shall abide in your heart. Devotion, spiritual wisdom, Realization, dispassion, Yoga, My 
exploits as well as their secrets and classification — by My grace you shall obtain insight 
into all these and shall not be required to undergo the rigours of Sadhana (self-discipline). 
(1 — 4) 
 “None of the errors that arise from Maya shall cloud your mind any more. 
Henceforth know Me to be the same as Brahma, who is without beginning, birthless, 
devoid of attributes (the products of Maya) and yet a mine of (transcendent divine) virtues. 
Listen, Kakabhusundi : devotees are always dear to Me. Realizing this, cherish unflinching 
devotion to My feet in thought, word and deed.” (85 A-B) 

1058 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

 “Now listen to My most sacred teaching, which is not only true and easily intelligible 
but has also been echoed by the Vedas and other scriptures. I give you to hear My own 
conclusion; listen to it and imprint it on your mind; and forswearing everything else, 
worship Me. This world with all its varieties of life, both moving and motionless, is a 
creation of my Maya (delusive potency). I love them all, because all are My creatures. 
But human beings are the dearest to Me of all. Of human beings, the Brahmanas; of the 
Brahmanas, those well-versed in the Vedas; of these, again, those that follow the course 
of conduct prescribed in the Vedas; of these latter, those who are averse to the pleasure 
of sense are dear to Me, and yet more the wise; of the wise too I love a man of realization 
all the more; more beloved to Me even than these is my own servant (devotee), who solely 
depends on Me and has no other hope. Again and again I repeat to you the truth that 
no one is so dear to Me as My devotee. If Viranci (the Creator) too had no devotion to 
Me, he would be only as dear to Me as all the other creatures. And the humblest creature 
that breathes, if possessed of Devotion, is dear to Me as life : such is My nature.” 
(1-5) 

 “Tell Me, who would not love a faithful, amiable and sagacious servant? Listen 
attentively, O Kakabhusundi : the Vedas and Puranas declare this to be a sound 
principle:—” (86) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1059 

“A father has a number of sons, each differing from the others in character, temper 
and conduct. One is learned, another given to austerities, a third spiritually enlightened, 
a fourth rich, a fifth possessed of valour, a sixth charitably disposed, a seventh all-wise 
and an eighth intent on piety; but the father equally loves all. A ninth son is devoted to 
his father in thought, word and deed and never dreams of any other duty. This is the son 
whom the father loves as his own life, though he be a perfect ignoramus. In a like manner 
all animate and inanimate beings, including the subhuman species, gods, men and 
demons — in short, the whole of this universe is My creation and I am equally compassionate 
to all. Of these, however, he who adores Me in thought, word and deed, forswearing 
arrogance and wiles — ” (1 — 4) 
“Be it man, woman or one lacking the characteristics of both, or, for the matter of 
that, any living being whatsoever of the animate or inanimate world — he who adores Me 
with all his being, giving up all guile, is supremely dear to Me. O bird, I tell you in all 
sincerity that a guileless servant is dear to Me as life. Realizing this worship Me, 
abandoning all other hope and reliance. (87 A-B) 

1060 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Time shall have no power over you. Remember and adore Me unceasingly.” I did 
not feel sated with hearing the nectar-like words of the Lord; the hair on my body stood 
erect and I felt extremely delighted at heart. The joy I felt on the occasion was shared 
only by the mind and the ears (the auditory sense); the tongue had no power to tell it. 
The eyes alone had the blissful experience of beholding the Lord’s beauty; but how could 
they describe it, devoid of speech as they are? After He had gladdened me by His 
manifold exhortations in this way He again began to sport like a child as before. With 
tears in His eyes and His looks somewhat gloomy He looked at His mother (Kausalya) 
as if He were hungry. Seeing this the mother started up in haste and ran; and addressing 
Him in soft words clasped Him to her bosom. Then, laying Him in her lap she began to 
suckle Him, singing the while of Sri Rama’s charming exploits. (1 — 4) 

The men and women of Ayodhya remained ever absorbed in that (transcendental) 
joy, to attain which the blessed Lord Siva, the delighter of all, assumed His unsightly garb 
(such as a garland of human skulls, serpents for His ornaments, ashes for scented 
cosmetics and a tiger-skin for a loin-cloth). Those wise and virtuous souls who have 
tasted of that joy only once even in a dream think nothing of the joy of absorption into 
Brahma (much less of any other earthly or heavenly joy). (88 A-B) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1061 
After this I stayed a while at Ayodhya and enjoyed the Lord’s delightful childish 
sports. Having by Sri Rama’s grace obtained the boon of Devotion I adored my Lord’s 
feet and returned to my own hermitage. Ever since the Lord accepted me as his own I 
have never fallen a victim to delusion. I have told you at length all this strange story of how 
Sri Hari’s Maya made a puppet of me. Now I tell you my own realization, O lord of the 
winged creatures : unless we adore Sri Hari our troubles will not end. Listen, king of the 
birds : without Sri Rama’s grace it is not possible to know the Lord’s greatness. Without 
knowledge faith is out of the question; and without faith there can be no love. Shorn of 
love, devotion will not abide any more than the lubricity produced by water. (1 — 4) 
Is spiritual illumination possible without a preceptor ? Or, again, is it possible to 
acquire wisdom without dispassion? Or, as the Vedas and Puranas declare, can one 
attain happiness without devotion to Sri Hari? Again, dear Garuda, can one find peace 
without innate content? Can a boat ever float without water even though you strain every 
nerve till your last breath? (89 A-B) 
1062 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Without content ment desire cannot cease; and so long as desire continues you 
can never dream of happiness. Again, can desire be got rid of without adoring Sri Rama? 
Can a tree ever take root without soil? Can even-mindedness be acquired without spiritual 
enlightenment? Can anyone get moving space without ether? There can be no piety 
without faith. Can anyone get odour except from the earth and spread one’s glory except 
through austere penance? Can there be any taste in this world without water? Can virtue 
be acquired without waiting upon the wise, any more than colour can exist without the 
element of fire, my master? Can the mind be at rest without experiencing the joy inherent 
in one’s own self? Can there be any sensation of touch without air, and any success 
without faith? In a like manner the fear of rebirth can never cease except through worship 
of Sri Hari. (1 — 4) 
Without faith there can be no Devotion and Sri Rama never melts except through 
Devotion; and without Sri Rama’s grace the human soul can never attain peace even in 
a dream. Pondering thus, O Garuda of resolute mind, abandon all cavilling and 
scepticism and adore the all beautiful Sri Rama, the Hero of Raghu’s line, a fountain of 
mercy and the delight of all. (90 A-B) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1063 
Thus, my master, have I sung according to my own light the greatness of my lord’s 
glory, O king of the birds. I have not had recourse to any inventive skill; I have seen all 
this with my own eyes. Sri Rama’s greatness, His Name, beauty and the song of His 
praises, they are all boundless and endless; and the Lord of the Raghus Himself is infinite. 
The sages sing Sri Hari’s praises each according to his wits; but neither the Vedas nor 
Sesa (the serpent-god) nor the blessed Siva Himself can reach their end. All winged 
creatures, from yourself down to the mosquito, take their flight across the sky; but none 
can reach the end of it. Even so, dear Garuda, can anyone ever gauge the exent of Sri 
Rama’s greatness, unfathomable as it is ? Sri Rama’s body possesses the charm of a 
myriad Cupids. He is as inexorable in crushing the enemy as countless millions of Durgas. 
He enjoys the luxury of a myriad Indras and is immeasurable in expanse as a myriad 
firmaments. (1 — 4) 
He has the might of a myriad winds and the brilliance of a myriad suns. He is as 
cool as a myriad moons and allays all the fears of mundane existence. Again, He is 
irresistible unappoachable and interminable as a myriad Deaths. Nay, the Lord is 
irrepressible as a myriad fires. (91 A-B) 



1064 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

The Lord is unfathomable as a myriad Patalas and dreadful as a myriad Yamas. 
He is as sanctifying as countless millions of sacred places; nay, His very name 
obliterates all one’s accumulated sins. The Hero of Raghu’s line is as immovable as a 
myriad Himalayas and as deep as a myriad seas. The Lord is as liberal in bestowing all 
one’s cherished objects as a myriad cows of plenty. He is as witted as countless millions 
of Saradas and possesses the creative skill of a myriad Brahmas. Again, He is as good 
a preserver as a myriad Visnus and as thorough a destroyer as a myriad Rudras. He is 
as rich as a myriad Kuberas and as capable of bringing forth material universes as a 
myriad Mayas. He is as good a supporter (of the universes) as a myriad Sesas. In short, 
Lord Sri Rama, the sovereign of the universe, is infinite and incomparable ( in every 
respect). (1 — 4) 
Incomparable as He is, He has no compeer. Sri Rama alone is Sri Rama’s peer — 
so declare the Vedas — even as the sun really suffers diminution by being likened to a 
myriad glow-worms. So do the great sages sing the praises of Sri Hari each according 
to the flight of his own wits and the Lord lovingly hears them and feels delighted (however 
inadequate the praise may be); for He respects the sentiment of His devotees and is 
extremely kind. 
Sri Rama is an ocean of countless virtues : can anyone sound His depth? I have only 
told you the little I have myself heard from the saints. The Lord is won only by sincere 
Devotion and is a fountain of joy and an abode of compassion. Therefore, giving up worldly 
attachment, vanity and pride, one should ever adore Sita’s Spouse. (92 A-B) 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 1065 
The lord of the winged creatures was rejoiced to hear the agreeable words of 
Bhusundi and fluffed up his feathers. Tears rushed to his eyes and his soul was flooded 
with joy as he meditated on the glory of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). Recalling 
his former delusion he was filled with remorse at the thought that He had taken the 
dateless Brahma for a mere mortal. Again and again he bowed his head at the crow’s 
feet and loved him all the more, knowing him to be as good as Rama. Without a spiritual 
guide none can cross the ocean of mundane existence, though he be the equal of Viranci 
(the Creator) or Lord Sankara. He said, “I was bitten by the serpent of doubt, dear Sir. 
(As an effect of this snake-bite) I had several painful fits of stupor in the form of so many 
fallacies. But the Lord of the Raghus, the delight of His devotees, has saved me by 
sending me to a charmer in your person. By your grace my infatuation has ceased and 
I have learnt the incomparable mystery of Sri Rama.” (1 — 4) 
After eulogizing Kakabhusundi in many ways and bowing his head before him with 
joined palms Garuda proceeded in these polite, affectionate and gentle words : “In my 
ignorance, O my lord and master, I ask you a question. Knowing me to be your own 
servant, O ocean of compassion, carefully answer it. (93 A-B) 




1066 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“You are an omniscient knower of Truth, having reached beyond the darkness (of 
ignorance), intelligent, amiable, straight in your dealings and a storehouse of wisdom, 
dispassion and Realization. Above all you are a beloved servant of Sri Rama (the Lord 
of the Raghus). Yet wherefore did you get this form (of a crow)? Dear Sir, explain all this 
to me clearly. Also tell me, my master, where did you get this lovely Lake of 
Sri Rama’s exploits, O good bird? My lord, I have heard it from Siva Himself that you 
do not perish even during Mahapralaya (the Great Dissolution when Brahma himself 
retires into the Lord’s body after completing the 100 years of his existence). The divine 
Lord Siva would never utter an idle word and therefore my mind is in doubt. My lord, the 
whole universe with all its animate and inanimate beings, including the Nagas, human 
beings and gods, is an intended victim of Death. The Time-Spirit, which destroys 
countless universes, is ever mighty and irresistible.” (1 — 4) 
 “How is it that the most formidable Time-Spirit has no power over you? Tell me, 
my gracious lord, if it is a glory of spiritual insight or a feat of Yoga? O lord, my infatuation 
and delusion disappeared the moment I visited your hermitage. Tell me in a loving spirit, 
my lord, how did all this happen?” (94 A-B) 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 1067 

Uma, (continues Lord Siva,) the crow (Kakabhusundi) rejoiced to hear Garuda’s 
words and replied with utmost affection : “Blessed, blessed indeed is your intellect, O 
enemy of serpents. Your question is very pleasing to me. On hearing your loving and 
agreeable question I have been reminded of many previous births. I shall now narrate the 
whole of my story at full length; dear Garuda, listen to it attentively with all reverence. 
The muttering of prayers, austere penance, performing sacrifices, subjugation of the 
mind and the senses, undertaking sacred vows, charity, dispassion, right judgment, 
Yoga and Realization — the fruit of all these is devotion to the feet of Sri Rama (the Lord 
of the Raghus); without this no one can attain lasting peace. It was in this body that I 
was blessed with devotion to Sri Rama; hence it is so very dear to me. Everyone naturally 
loves that through which one has attained one’s object. (1 — 4) 
It is a sound maxim, O enemy of serpents, approved of by the Vedas — and the 
saints too endorse it — that love should be shown to the meanest creature if we come to 
know it to be our greatest friend. Silk, for instance, is the product of a worm and from 
it we have beautiful silken textiles. That is why everyone tends the worm like one’s own 
life even though it is most impure. (95 A-B) 

1068 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The real self-interest of every living creature lies in cultivating devotion to Sri 
Rama’s feet in thought, word and deed. That body alone is sacred and that alone 
blessed, in which one is able to worship the Hero of Raghu’s line. The wise and the 
learned never extol him who is hostile to Sri Rama, even though he may acquire a body 
as exalted as that of Brahma (the Creator) himself, Devotion to Sri Rama took root in my 
heart in this very body; hence I hold it supremely dear, my master. Although my death 
depends on my own will, I refuse to quit this body, because — as the Vedas declare — 
adoration of the Lord is not possible without a corporeal frame. At first infatuation gave 
me much trouble; so long as I remained indifferent to Sri Rama I never had a restful sleep. 
Through a number of births I practised Yoga (concentration of mind), Japa (muttering of 
prayers), austere penance and charity and performed sacrifices and other acts of various 
kinds. Which species is there in this world, O lord of the winged creatures, in which I have 
not at sometime been born during my round of births? I have had experience of all kinds 
of pursuits, my lord; but I was never so happy as I am now. I recollect many previous 
existences, my lord, in which by Siva’s grace my understanding was not clouded by 
infatuation. (1 — 5) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 


1069 

Listen, O lord of the feathered kingdom : I now proceed to narrate the story of my very 
first birth (within my memory), which is sure to engender in the heart of the listener love for 
the Lord’s feet, which is the remedy for all afflictions. In a former Kalpa (round of creation), 
my lord, the world was passing through a Kaliyuga, the hotbed of sin, in which men and women were all steeped in unrighteousness and acted contrary to the Vedas. (96 A-B) 

In that Kaliyuga I was born in the city of Ayodhya and got the body of a Sudra (a 
member of the labouring and artisan classes). A devotee of Lord Siva in thought, word 
and deed, I was a reviler of other gods and conceited too. Intoxicated with the pride of 
pelf, I was most loquacious and savage of purpose and carried an enormous load of 
hypocrisy in my heart. Even though I dwelt in the capital of Sri Rama (the lord of the 
Raghus), I failed to know even an iota of its glory then. Now I have come to know the 
greatness of Ayodhya. Thus has it been sung by the Vedas, Tantras and Puranas that 
whoever has resided in Ayodhya in any birth whatsoever surely becomes a votary of Sri 
Rama. A man comes to know the glory of Ayodhya only when Sri Rama, bow in hand, 
takes up His abode in his heart. That particular age of Kali was terrible indeed, O enemy 
of serpents; every man and woman was given over to sin. (1 — 4) 

1070 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Every virtue had been engulfed by the sins of Kali; all good books had disappeared; 
impostors had promulgated a number of creeds which they had invented out of their own 
wit. The people had all fallen a prey to delusion and all pious acts had been swallowed 
by greed. Now listen, all-wise mount of Sri Hari, while I describe a few charaetestis of 
Kali. (97 A-B) 
No one follows the duties of one’s own caste, and the four Asramas or stages of 
life also disappear. Every man and woman takes delight in revolting against the Vedas. 
The Brahmanas sell the Vedas; the kings bleed their subjects; no one respects the injunction 
of the Vedas. The right course for every individual is that which one takes a fancy to; a 
man of erudition is he who plays the braggart. Whoever launches spurious undertakings 
and is given over to hypocrisy, him does everyone call a saint. He alone is clever, who 
robs another of his wealth; he who puts up false appearances is an ardent follower of 
established usage. He who is given to lying and is clever at joking is spoken of as a man 
of parts in the Kali age. He alone who is a reprobate and has abandoned the path of the 
Vedas is a man of wisdom and dispassion in the Kali age. He alone who has grown big 
nails and long locks of matted hair is a renowned ascetic in the Kali age. (1 — 4) 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 1071 
They alone who put on an unsightly garb and ornaments, eat anything and everything, 
no matter whether it is worth eating or not, are ascetics; they alone are perfect men and 
they are worth adoring in the Kali age. They who are of maleficent conduct are held in 
great esteem and they alone are worthy of honour. Even so they alone who are babblers 
in thought, word and deed are orators in the Kali age. (98 A-B) 
Dominated by women, my lord, all men dance to their tune like a monkey 
controlled by its trainer. Sudras instruct the twice-born in spiritual wisdom and, wearing 
the sacred thread, accept the worst type of gifts. All men are given over to sensuality 
and greed and irascible too, and are hostile to the gods; the Brahmanas, the Vedas as 
well as to the saints. Unfortunate wives desert their accomplished and handsome 
husband and bestow their heart on a paramour. Wives having their husband alive have 
no ornament on their person, while widows adorn themselves in the latest style. The 
disciple and the preceptor severally resemble a deaf man and a blind man : the one 
would not listen, while the other cannot see. A spiritual guide who robs his disciple of 
money but fails to rid him of his sorrow is cast into a terrible hell. Parents call their 
children and teach them such means as may fill their belly. (1 — 4) 


1072 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Men and women talk of nothing else than the Knowledge of Brahma; while in their 
greed they would kill a Brahmana or, for the matter of that, even their own spiritual guide 
for the sake of a single shell. Sudras argue with the twice-born : “Are we in anyway 
inferior to you? A good Brahmana is he who knows the truth of Brahma !” and defiantly 
glower at them. (99 A-B) 
They alone who are covetous of antother’s wife and are clever at wiles and 
steeped in delusion, malice and worldly attachment are enlightened men swearing by the 
identity of the individual soul with Brahma. Such is the practice I have seen in every Kali 
age. Doomed themselves, such people bring ruin even to those rare souls who tread the 
path of virtue. They who find fault with the Vedas by dint of logic are condemned to each 
hell for a whole Kalpa (cycle). People of the lowest grade in society such as oil-men, 
potters, the outcaste (lit., those who cook and feed on the flesh of a dog), the Kiratas 
and Kolas and the distillers of spirituous liquors get their heads shaved and enter the 
order of Sartinyasa (renunciation) when their wife is no more in this world and they have 
lost their household property. They allow themselves to be worshipped by the Brahmanas 
and bring ruin to themselves here as well as hereafter. As for the Brahmanas, they are 
unlettered, grasping, lascivious, reprobate and stupid and marry low-caste women of a 
lewd character. Sudras, on the other hand, practise Japa (the muttering of prayers) and 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 1073 

austere penance, undertake sacred vows of various kinds and expound the Puranas from 
an exalted seat. All men follow a course of conduct of their own imagination; the endless 
variety of wrongdoing cannot be described in words. (1 — 5) 
In the age of Kali there ensues a confusion of castes (due to promiscuous 
intermarriages) and everyone infringes the sacred laws. Men perpetrate sins and reap 
suffering terror, disease, sorrow and desolation. Overcome by delusion they walk not in 
the path of Devotion to Sri Hari, conjoined with dispassion and wisdom — a path which 
has the approval of the Vedas — and invent diverse creeds of their own. (100 A-B) 

1074 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The so-called recluses build themselves houses and furnish them at considerable 
expense; dispassion is no more to be seen in them, the same having been wiped out by 
their sensuality. The so-called ascetics grow wealthy and householders go penniless: the 
freaks of the Kali age, dear Garuda, are beyond all telling. Men drive out a well-born and 
virtuous wife and bring home some servant-girl, casting to the winds all good usage. 
Sons respect their father and mother only so long as they have not seen the face of their 
wife. From the time they take a fancy to their wife’s kinsfolk they begin to look upon their 
own people as their enemies. Kings get addicted to sin and cease to have anything to 
do with piety. They ever persecute their subjects by inflicting unmerited punishment on 
them. The meanest churl, if he is rich, is accounted noble. A Brahmana is known only 
by his sacred thread, and an ascetic by his naked body. He who refuses to recognize 
the Vedas and Puranas is a true saint and servant of Sri Hari in the Kali age. Poets are 
seen in large numbers; but the munificent (who reward them) are seldom heard of. Those 
who find fault with others’ virtues can be had in any number, but no one possessing 
virtues. In the Kali age famines are of frequent occurrence: for want of foodgrains people 
perish miserably en masse. (1 — 5) 
Listen, lord of the winged creatures : in the age of Kali duplicity, perversity, hypocrisy, 
malice, heresy, pride, infatuation, concupiscence and arrogance etc., pervade the whole 
universe. Men practise Japa (the muttering of prayers), austere penance and charity, perform 
sacrifices and undertake sacred vows with some unholy motive. The gods rain not upon 
the earth and foodgrains sown in the soil do not germinate. (1 01 A-B) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 1075 
Women have no ornament except their tresses and have an enormous appetite. 
Though miserable for want of money, they are rich in attachment of various kinds. 
Though hankering after happiness they love not piety, stupid as they are. Though they 
are poor in wits, their mind is hardened and knows no tenderness. As for men, they are 
tormented with diseases and find no enjoyment anywhere. They are conceited and 
contend with others without any rhyme or reason. Men’s life is short, extending to not 
more than a few years; yet in their pride they reckon on surviving the end of creation. 
The age of Kali has driven men mad: no one respects the sanctity even of one’s sister 
or daughter. There is no contentment, nor discernment, nor composure. People of all 
classes, whether high or low, have taken to begging. Envy, harsh words and covetousness 
are rampant; while evenness of mind is absent. People are all smitten with bereavement 
and deep sorrow. The duties and rules of conduct prescribed for the four orders of society 
and stages in life are neglected. Self-control, charity, compassion and wisdom disappear; 
while stupidity and fraud multiply to a large extent. Men and women all pamper their body; 
while slanderers are diffused all over the world. (1 — 5) 
Listen, O enemy of serpents: the age of Kali is a storehouse of impurities and 
vices. But it has many virtues too; final emancipation is possible (in this age) without any 
exertion. Moreover, the same goal which is reached through worship of God, performance 
of sacrifices or practice of Yoga in the Satyayuga, Treta and Dvapara, men are able to 
attain through the name of Sri Hari in the Kali age. (102 A-B) 
1076 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
In the Satyayuga everyone is possessed of mystic powers and wise too. Hence in 
that age men cross the ocean of mundane existence by meditating on Sri Hari. In the 
Treta age men perform sacrifices of various kinds and cross the ocean of metempsychosis 
by dedicating their actions to the Lord. In the Dvapara age men cross the ocean of 
worldly existence by adoring the feet of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), there being 
no other means to do it. In the Kali age, however, men reach the end of mundane 
existence simply by singing Sri Hari’s praises. In the age of Kali neither Yoga (concentration 
of mind), nor the performance of sacrifices nor spiritual wisdom is of any avail; one’s only 
hope lies in hymning Sri Rama’s praises. Giving up all other hopes, whosoever worships 
Sri Rama and fondly chants His praises undoubtedly crosses the ocean of transmigration. 
The power of the Name is thus manifest in the age of Kali. The Kali age possesses 
another sacred virtue: in this age projected acts of virtuous nature are virtues but those 
of evil propensity are not sins. (1 — 4) 

No other age can compare with the Kali age provided a man has faith (in its virtue); 
for in this age one can easily cross the ocean of transmigration simply by singing Sri 
Rama’s holy praises. Piety has four well-known pillars, of which one is predominant in 
the Kali: charity practised in any way conduces to one’s spiritual good. (103 A-B) 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 1077 
Prompted by Sri Rama’s delusive potency, the characteristics of all the four Yugas 
manifest themselves in everyone’s heart everyday. The presence of pure Sattva 
(harmony), evenness of mind, spiritual insight and the feeling of vivacity in the heart are 
the effects of Satyayuga. Abundance of Sattva with a slight admixture of Rajas, 
attachment to action, and happiness of every kind are the characteristics of Treta. 
Much Rajas, little Sattva, and some Tamas, with a feeling of mingled joy and fear in 
the heart, are the distinguishing features of Dvapara. A large proportion of Tamas with 
a slight admixture of Rajas and antagonism everywhere are the effects of Kali. The wise 
discern the characteristics of the different Yugas in their mind and forswearing 
unrighteousness devote themselves to piety. The characteristics of the Time-Spirit have 
no effect on him who is excessively fond of Sri Rama’s feet. The deception practised 
by a juggler, O king of the birds, is formidable indeed: but the tricks of a juggler cannot 
deceive his servant. (1 — 4) 
The good and evil, which are the creation of Sri Hari’s delusive potency, cannot 
be eliminated except through worship of Sri Hari. Bearing this in mind, and forswearing 
all desire, one should adore Sri Hari. In that particular age of Kali, O lord of the winged 




1078 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


creatures, I lived in Ayodhya for many years till a famine occurred, when, stricken by 
adversity, I had to move to another place. (104 A-B) 

Chapter 211
Listen, O enemy of serpents : I went to Ujjain — miserable, downcast, penniless 
and afflicted. When sometime had elapsed, I acquired some wealth and after that I began 
worshipping Lord Sambhu at that very place. There was a Brahmana there who 
constantly worshipped Lord Siva according to the Vedic rites and had no other 
occupation. He was an extremely pious soul and a knower of the highest truth, a votary 
of Lord Sambhu but no reviler of Sri Hari. I served him though with a guileful heart. The 
Brahmana was very kind-hearted and an abode of piety. Seeing me outwardly so 
humble, my Lord, the Brahmana taught me as his own son. The great Brahmana 
imparted to me a mystic formula sacred to Lord Sambhu and gave me every kind of good 
advice. I used to go to a temple of Lord Siva and repeat the formula there with unbounded 
ostentation and conceit in my heart. (1 — 4) 
A wretch impure of mind, low-born and overcome by infatuation, I was filled with 
jealousy at the very sight of a servant of Sri Hari or a Brahmana and hated God Visnu 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 1079 


Distressed to see my conduct, my preceptor would admonish me everyday; but on hearing 
his admonition I burnt with rage. Can sober counsel appeal to a hypocrite? (1 05 A-B) 
One day my preceptor called me and taught me wisdom in every possible way; 
“The sole reward, my son, of worshipping Lord Siva is uninterrupted devotion to 
Sri Rama’s feet. Siva Himself as well as Brahma (the Creator), dear son, adore 
Sri Rama; of what account, then, is a vile human being ! Do you hope to attain 
happiness, O wretched soul, by harbouring ill-will to Him whose feet are loved by 
Brahma and Siva Himself?” When I heard my Guru speak of Lord Hara as a votary of 

1080 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Chapter 212
Sri Hari, my heart, O lord of the feathered kingdom, was all on fire. Vile of descent as 
I was, the little learning that I had acquired turned my head even as a serpent becomes 
all the more poisonous when fed on milk. Proud, perverse, wretched and low-born, I 
playes mischief to my Guru day and night. My Guru, however, was too tenderhearted to 
have the least anger in him; on the other hand, he gave me good advice time after time. 
The first thing a vile fellow does is to kill and destroy the very man who has been 
instrumental in exalting him. Listen, brother : smoke, which is produced by fire, extinguishes 
the latter when it attains to the dignity of a cloud. The dust lying on the road is held in 
contempt and is ever trodden under foot by all (the wayfarers). But when carried aloft by 
the wind, it first envelopes the air itself and then descends on the eyes or diadems of 
king. Listen, O lord of the winged creatures: realizing this state of things, the wise shun 
the company of vile men. Seers and learned men have declared this maxim: it is good 
neither to quarrel with a wretch nor to make friends with him. One should always remain 
aloof from him, my master; a wicked fellow should be avoided even as a dog. Vicious 
as I was with a heart full of falsehood and perversity, the Guru’s admonition did not appeal 
to me, even though it was wholesome. (1 — 8) 
One day I was repeating Siva’s Name in a temple sacred to Lord Hara, when my 
Guru came in; but in my pride I did not rise to greet him. He was too gracious to say 
anything; neither did he feel the least resentment in his heart. But the grievous sin of showing 
disrespect to a Guru was more than the great Lord Siva could tolerate. (1 06 A-B) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 

Chapter 213
1081 
An ethereal voice proceeded from the temple itself: “you wretched and conceited 
fool, even though your preceptor has no anger in him and he is very tender-hearted 
and possessed of true and perfect wisdom, yet, O fool, I must pronounce a curse 
on you; for any transgression of propriety is loathsome to Me. If I do not punish you, 
O wretch, the sanctity of My Vedic laws will be violated. The fools who bear malice 
against their Guru are cast into the hell named Raurava for a myriad Yugas. After 
that they take birth in the subhuman species and suffer torment for ten thousand 
successive existence. Since you remained rooted to your seat like a python, O vile 
wretch, take the form of a snake; for your mind is steeped in sin. And, condemned 
to that vile state, O vilest of the vile, go and take up your abode in the hollow of 
some huge tree.” (1 — 4) 

The Guru raised a piteous wail as he heard Lord Siva’s terrible curse. And when 
he saw me trembling with fear, deep agony possessed his soul. Reflecting on my awful 
fate, the Brahmana prostrated himself before Lord Siva and, with joined palms and his 
voice choked with emotion, he prayed as follows: — (107 A-B) 
1082 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


“I adore You, the guardian of the south-east quarter and Ruler of the whole 
universe, eternal bliss personified, the omnipresent and all-pervading Brahma manifest in 
the form of the Vedas. I worship Lord Siva, shining in His own glory, devoid of material 
attributes, undifferentiated, desireless, all-pervading consciousness, having nothing to 
wrap about Himself except ether (or enveloping ether itself). I bow to the supreme Lord, 
who is devoid of form, transcendent and extra-cosmic, beyond speech, understanding 
and senseperception, terrible yet gracious, the seed of the mystic syllable OM, the Ruler 
of Kailasa, the Devourer even of the great Time-Spirit and the abode of virtues. I adore 
the all-merciful Sankara, the universal Lord, who is loved by all and yet unfathomable, 
who is possessed of a form white as the snowclad Himalaya, and radiant with the beauty 
of a myriad Cupids, whose head sparkles with the lovely stream of the Gariga, whose 
brow is adorned by the crescent moon and neck coiled by serpents, who has tremulous 
pendants hanging from His ear-lobes, is possessed of beautiful eyebrows and large 
eyes, who has a cheerful countenance and a blue speck on His throat, and who has a 
lion-skin wrapped round His waist and a garland of skulls round His neck. I take my 
refuge in Bhavani’s Spouse, the supreme Lord, terrible, exalted, intrepid indivisible, 
unborn and invested with the glory of a myriad suns, who roots out the threefold agony 
and holds a trident in His hand and who is accessible only through love. Beyond number, 
ever blessed, bringing about universal destruction at the end of each round of creation, 
a source of perpetual delight to the virtuous, Slayer of the demon Tripura, Consciousness 
and Bliss personified, dispeller of delusion, be propitious, my lord, be propitious, O 
Destroyer of Cupid. So long as they worship not the lotus-feet of Lima’s lord, there is no 
happiness nor peace nor cessation of suffering for men either in this world or in the next. 
Therefore, be propitious, my lord, dwelling as You do in the heart of all living beings. 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 1083 

I know not Yoga (concentration), nor Japa (the muttering of prayers) nor ritual. I simply 
bow to you at all times and at every moment, O Sambhu! Pray, protect me, my lord, 
miserable and afflicted by sufferings attendant on old age and birth (and death) as I am, 
O Lord Sambhu!” (1—8) 
This hymn of eight verses was uttered by the Brahmana in order to propitiate Lord 
Hara. Sri Sambhu is pleased with those men who devoutly repeat it. (9) 
The all-wise Siva heard the Brahmana’s prayer and saw his devotion. An ethereal 
voice issued from the temple again: Ask for a boon, O great Brahmana.” “If, my lord, you 
are pleased with me and if, my master, You are affectionate to the meek, first bless me 
with devotion to Your feet and then grant me another boon. Overcome by Your Maya 
(delusive power) the stupid Jiva (individual soul) constantly wanders (from one womb to 
another) in error. Therefore, O all-merciful Lord, be not angry with him. Now be gracious 
to this creature, O Sankara, compassionate as You are to the humble, so that Your 
curse may prove a blessing to him not long afterwards. (108 A — D) 

1084 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
“Now do that which may bring him supreme blessedness, O fountain of mercy !” 
On hearing the Brahmana’s words, steeped as they were in charity, the heavenly voice 
replied : “So be it ! Although he has committed a grievous sin and I in My wrath have 
pronounced a curse on him, yet, realizing your goodness, I shall do him a special favour. 
O holy Brahmana, they who are of a forgiving disposition and beneficent are as dear to 
Me as Sri Rama (the Slayer of the demon Khara) Himself. Nonetheless, O Brahmana, 
My curse shall not go in vain : this fellow shall surely pass through a thousand incarnations. 
But the terrible agony involved in each successive birth and death shall not affect him in 
the least. (Turning to me, the voice continued :) Hear, O Sudra, my authentic word : in 
none of your births shall your awareness (of previous existences) leave you. (In the first 
place) You were born in the capital of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), and besides that 





* UTTARA-KANDA* 1085 

you set your heart on My worship. Due to the miraculous power of the holy city and by My 
grace, devotion to Sri Rama shall spring up in your bosom. Now, brother, hear My solemn 
declaration: a vow to serve the Brahmanas is the surest means of propitiating 
Sri Hari. Insult the Brahmanas no more and reckon a saint to be on a par with the infinite 
Lord Himself. Even he who does not succumb to the stroke of Indra’s thunderbolt, My 
own mighty trident, the rod of Death and the terrible discus of Sri Hari, is consumed by 
the fire of hostility with the Brahmanas. Treasure up this counsel in your heart, and there 
will be nothing in this world which may be too difficult for you to attain. I bestow one more 
blessing on you: you shall have unobstructed access everywhere.” (1 — 8) 
The Guru rejoiced to hear the word of Lord Siva (as conveyed through the ethereal 
voice) and cried ‘Amen!’ And after admonishing me he returned home, with the image of 
Lord Sambhu’s feet impressed upon his heart. Driven by my fate I went to the Vindhya 
mountains and was (on giving up the ghost) reborn as a serpent and again, when 
sometime had elapsed, I easily dropped that form. Whatever form I assumed, O mount 
of Sri Hari, dropped again with utmost ease, even as a man would cast off worn-out 
clothes and put on a new set. Lord Siva vindicated the Vedic law, while I was spared 
the agony (involved in the rounds of birth and death). In this way, O lord of the winged 
creatures, I assumed various forms; but my understanding 

1086 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 

Whatever form I assumed, whether of an irrational being, god or man, I continued to 
adore Sri Rama even in that form. Yet one thing ever stung my conscience: my Guru’s 
mild and amiable disposition I could never forget. The last body I got was that of a 
Brahmana, which the Vedas and Puranas declare as difficult even for the gods to attain. 
Even in that incarnation whenever I joined the other boys for play, I would enact all the 
pastimes of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) alone. As I grew up my father gave me 
lessons (in secular subjects). I tried to understand things, listened to the lessons and 
reflected on them; yet they failed to attract my mind. All worldly cravings left my soul; I 
was solely absorbed in the thought of Sri Rama’s feet. Tell me, O lord of the feathered 
creation: is there anyone so wretched as to give up a cow of plenty and tend a she-ass? 
Overwhelmed with love I had no charm left for anything and my father was tired of 
coaching me. When both my father and mother died, I withdrew to the forest in order to 
worship the Protector of His servants. In the forest wherever I met any great sage I visited 
his hermitage and bowed my head to him. I would ask them to recount Sri Rama’s virtues 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 1087 

and listened with delight to what they told me. O lord of the winged creatures ! In this way I 
went about listening to the recital of Sri Hari’s praises. By Sambhu’s grace my movements 
were unchecked everywhere. The three types of ardent seeking (viz., those for progeny, 
wealth and fame) left me and one solitary longing grew to inordinate proportions in my 
heart. “I shall deem the object of my birth accomplished only when I behold Sri Rama’s 
lotus-feet,” I said to myself. Every sage I interrogated observed, “God represents the 
totality of created beings.” But the view which holds God as impersonal did not find favour 
with me and the love I bore in my heart for the embodied Brahma grew from more to more. 
( 1 - 8 ) 
Even as I recalled the words of my erstwhile preceptor my mind conceived a 
fondness for Rama’s feet and I went about singing the praises of Sri Rama (the Lord of 
the Raghus) with a love which gathered new strength every moment. On a peak of 
Mount Meru in the shade of a banyan tree sat the sage Lomasa. On seeing him I bowed 
at his feet and addressed him in the humblest strain. When the gracious sage heard my 
meek and gentle address, O king of the birds, he politely enquired : “For what purpose 
have you come, O Brahmana?” Thereupon I replied, “O fountain of mercy, you are 
omniscient and sagacious. Tell me, blessed one, how to worship the embodied supreme 
Spirit.” (110 A— D) 

1088 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Thereupon the great sage recounted with reverence a few virtues of Sri Rama (the 
Lord of the Raghus), O lord of the feathered creation. But himself devoted to the 
knowledge of Brahma (the Absolute), and knowing me to be the fittest person (to be 
initiated into such knowledge), the enlightened sage began a sermon on Brahma, the 
unborn, the One without a second and without attributes, the Ruler of the heart (the inner 
Controller), incomprehensible, desireless, without name or form, attainable only through 
realization, indivisible and incomparable, beyond the mind and the senses, immaculate 
and indestructible, immutable, unlimited and all-blissful : “You are identical with the 
Brahma referred to above; no more difference exists between Him and you than between 
a sheet of water and the ripples on its surface: so declare the Vedas.” The sage 
instructed me in various ways; but the truth that the individual soul is identical with the 
attributeless Brahma did not appeal to my heart. Bowing my head at his feet I submitted 
again, “Kindly tell me how to worship the embodied Brahma, O lord of the sages. My 
mind takes delight in the worship of Sri Rama even as a fish rejoiees in water; how, then, 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 
1089 
can it exist without it, O wise lord of the sages? Be gracious, therefore, to teach me the 
method whereby I may be able to behold the Lord of the Raghus with my own eyes. 
Having feasted my eyes on the King of Ayodhya I will then listen to your discourse on 
the attributeless Brahma.” The sage once more recited the incomparable story of 
Sri Hari; but demolishing the doctrine that the supreme Spirit does appear in an embodied 
form, he established the proposition that He is ever without attributes. Thereupon I would 
set aside the view that God is ever attributeless and establish with great obstinacy the 
doctrine that He takes an embodied form. When I thus entered into hot discussion with 
him, signs of resentment appeared on the sage’s person. Listen, my lord: insolence 
carried to an excess rouses passion even in the breast of an enlightened soul. Too much 
friction will produce fire even out of sandal-wood. (1 — 8) 
Again and again in the heat of passion the sage expatiated on spiritual wisdom, 
while I sat still and put myself various questions : “Can there be anger without duality or 
duality without ignorance? Can an individual soul, dull, finite and subject to Maya, ever 
be on a par with God?” (1 1 1 A-B)


Chapter 214

1090 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “Can suffering ensue from solicitude for others’ well-being? Can anyone possessing 
the philosopher’s stone suffer from want any longer? Can the malevolent be free from 
anxiety? Can the lesful escape obloquy? Can one’s posterity survive even though one 
has persecuted the Brahmanas? Can one continue to perform actions (with attachment) 
even after attaining Self-Realization? Has anyone acquired sound wisdom while living in 
the company of the vicious? Can an adulterer attain a happy destiny? Can those who 
have realized God fall again into the ocean of transmigration? Can the revilers of Sri Hari 
be ever happy? Can a kingdom stand without the knowledge of statecraft? Can sins 
persist even after one has commenced narrating Sri Hari’s exploits? Can one enjoy 
sacred renown without religious merit and can anyone earn a bad reputation without a 
sin? Is there any gain as valuable as Devotion to Sri Hari, which is glorified alike by saints 
as well as by the Vedas and Puranas? And, brother, is there any loss in the world as 
grievous as not adoring Sri Rama even after obtaining a human body? Is there any other 
sin so bad as backbiting or any virtue so great as compassion, O mount of Sri Hari?” In 
this way I mentally advanced numberless arguments in my favour and did not listen to 
the sage’s teaching with any reverence. Again and again I maintained the cause of the 
Saguna form of worship (the worship of an embodied Deity), till at last the sage uttered 
these angry words : “Fool, you refuse to accept the supreme lesson I have been inparting 
on you and indulge in endless arguments and counter-arguments. You give no credence 
to my authentic words and, like a crow, look on everything with distrust ! Fool, you are 
exceedingly self-opinionated; therefore, you shall at once take the form of a crow (the 
pariah among birds).” I bowed to the curse prohounced by the sage but felt neither 
alarmed nor humbled. (1 — 8) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 1091 
I was immediately transformed into a crow. Thereupon I bowed my head at the 
sage’s feet again and, fixing my thoughts on Sri Rama, the Jewel of Raghu’s line, joyfully 
took flight. Uma, (continues Lord Sankara,) they who are devoted to Sri Rama’s feet and 
are free from lust, vanity and anger look upon the whole word as full of their lord; against 
whom can they harbour animosity? (112 A-B) 

1092 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Listen, O lord of the winged creatures : the sage was in no way at fault; it is 
Sri Rama (the Ornament of Raghu’s race) who prompts all hearts. The All-merciful put my 
devotion to the test by clouding the sage’s reason. When He came to know that I was His 
devoted servant in thought, word and deed, the Lord disabused the saint again. The sage 
was amazed at my extraordinary forbearance and the unique faith in Sri Rama’s feet and, 
repenting again and again politely called me back. He consoled me in everyway and then 
gladly imparted to me the formula sacred to Sri Rama. The gracious sage also taught me 
how to meditate on Sri Rama as a child. The form which I was thus taught to fix my 
thoughts upon, charming and delightful as it was, pleased me much; I have already told 
you the same. The sage detained me in his hermitage for sometime and then recited the 
“Ramacaritamanasa” (the Manasa lake of Sri Rama’s exploits). Having reverently repeated 
the story the sage then addressed me in the following gracious words : “I discovered this 
secret and charming lake of Sri Rama’s exploits, dear son, by the grace of Lord Sambhu. I 
have come to know that you are a beloved devotee of Sri Rama; hence I recited it to you 
in full. Never repeat it, dear child, in the presence of those whose heart is void of devotion 
to Sri Rama.” The sage admonished me in various ways and I lovingly bowed my head at 
his feet. The great sage touched my head with his lotus palm and gladly gave me his 
blessing : “Henceforth, by my grace, devotion to Sri Rama shall ever abide in your heart 
and know no interruption. (1 — 8) 
You shall ever be a favourite with Sri Rama and a storehouse of good qualities, free 
from pride, changing your form at will and choosing your own time for death, and a repository 
of wisdom and dispassion. Nay, in whatever hermitage you live with your thought fixed on 
the Lord, ignorance will have no access within a radius of eight miles from it. (113 A-B) 

* UTTARA-KANDA * 1093 
 “No suffering occasioned by time, fate, merit, demerit or disposition shall ever 
torment you. The manifold charming mysteries of Sri Rama, that are found mentioned 
in the chronicles and Puranas either explicitly or implicitly, you will come to know 
without any difficulty; and the flame of your devotion to Sri Rama’s feet will grow 
ever brighter and brighter. Whatever longing you may entertain in your mind, you 
shall have no difficulty in attaining it by the grace of Sri Hari.” On hearing the sage’s 
benediction, mark me, O Garuda of steadfast reason, a deep voice — which was 
evidently the voice of the Supreme Spirit — was heard from the heavens: “May your 
prophesy come to be true, O enlightened sage ! He is My votary in thought, word 
and deed.” I rejoiced to hear the heavenly voice and stood overwhelmed with love 
and rid of all my doubts. On receiving the sage’s permission in response to my 
prayer I repeatedly bowed my head at his feet and gladly came away to this hermitage, 
having obtained by the Lord’s grace a rare boon. Listen, O lord of the feathered 
creation : I have now lived in this hermitage for seven and twenty rounds of creation. 

I am ever engaged in hymning the praises of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), 
while enlightened birds reverently listen to them. Each time the Hero of Raghu’s line 
assumes the form of a man in the city of Ayodhya for the sake of His devotees 
I go and stay at the capital of Sri Rama and enjoy the spectacle of His childish 
sports. Again, enshrining an image of the child Rama in my heart I return to my 
hermitage, O king of the birds. I have now told you all the circumstances that invested 

1094 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
me with the form of a crow, and have also replied to all your queries. The glory of 
devotion to Sri Rama is superb indeed. (1 — 8) 
I love this body only because it was in this body that devotion to Sri Rama’s feet 
sprang up in my heart, I was blessed with the sight of my lord and all my doubts 
vanished. (114 A) 
I stubbornly upheld the cause of Devotion, for which the great sage Lomasa 
cursed me; but eventually I obtained a boon which is difficult even for the sages to obtain, 
Witness the efficacy of adoration. (114 B) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 
1095 
They who knowingly cast aside such Devotion and take pains to acquire mere 
wisdom are fools who would leave alone the cow of plenty at their own house and knock 
about in search of the Aka plant (the milk-weed) to get milk out of it. Listen. O lord of 
the winged creatures; the fools who ignore Bhakti and seek happiness by any other 
means stupidly seek to swim across the ocean without the help of a vessel”. Garuda, 
O Bhavanl, (continues Lord Sankara,) rejoiced to hear Bhusundi’s words and submitted 
in gentle accents : “By your grace, my lord, doubt, sorrow, error and delusion have 
disappeared from my heart. I have also listened to the praises of Sri Rama and attained 
peace of mind by your blessing. My lord, I ask you one question more: pray, explain the 
whole thing clearly, O ocean of compassion. The saints and sages as well as the Vedas 
and Puranas declare that there is nothing so difficult of attainment as wisdom. Although 
the sage (Lomasa) instructed you in the same, my lord, you did not show the same 
amount of regard for Gnosis as for Devotion. Explain to me, my gracious lord, all the 
difference between Gnosis and Devotion.” The sagacious crow was gratified to hear the 
question of Garuda (the enemy of the serpents) and politely replied, “There is no 
difference whatsoever between Gnosis and Devotion : both are equally efficacious in 
relieving the torments of birth and death. Great sages nonetheless point out some 
difference between the two, my lord: listen to the same with rapt attention, O chief of the 
birds ! Wisdom, dispassion, Yoga (union with God) and Realization — mark me — are all 
masculine in conception, O mount of Sri Hari ! The might of man is stronger indeed; while 
a woman is naturally weak and dull by her very birth. (1 — 8) 
But that man alone who is unattached and resolute of mind can forwear woman — 
not the sensual voluptuary, who has turned his face against the feet of Sri Rama (the 
Hero of Raghu’s line). But even such an enlightened sage, O mount of Sri Hari, succumbs 








1096 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


to the charms of a pretty woman at the very sight of her moon-like face. It is God Visnu’s 
own Maya (deluding potency) that manifests itself in the form of a woman! (1 1 5 A-B) 
Here I do not speak in a partisan spirit, but merely state the view of the Vedas 
and Puranas as well as of the saints. A woman is never enamoured of another woman’s 
beauty : this, O enemy of the serpents, is a strange phenomenon. Maya and Bhakti 
(Devotion), mark me, both belong to the feminine group, as everyone knows. Again, 
Bhakti is beloved of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line); while poor Maya is a mere 
dancing girl. The Lord of the Raghus is well-disposed towards Bhakti; hence Maya is 
terribly afraid of her. Nay, Maya shrinks at the very sight of the man in whose heart ever 
abides unobstructed the peerless and guileless spirit of Devotion, and cannot wield her 
authority over him. Knowing this, sages who have realized the Truth solicit Bhakti, which 
is the fountain of all blessings. (1 — 4) 
No one can speedily know this secret of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus); but 
whoever comes to know it by the grace of Raghupati Himself can never fall a prey to 
infatuation even in a dream. Further hear, most sagacious Garuda, the distinction 




* UTTARA-KANDA * 1097 

between Gnosis and Devotion, by hearing which one develops perpetual and uninterrupted 
love for Sri Rama’s feet. (116 A-B) 
Listen, dear Garuda, to this unutterable nasatav, which can only be comprehended 
by the mind but is incapable of expression. The soul is a particle of the Divinity, immortal, 
conscious, untainted by Maya and blissful by nature. Such a soul, my lord, has allowed 
itself to be dominated by Maya and has been caught in its own trap like a parrot or a 
monkey*. Matter and Spirit have been linked together with a knot which, though imaginary, 
* The allusion is to two popular modes of catching parrots and monkeys. A stick with a bait at the end 
and a string attached to it is so set in the ground that it revolves from the weight of the parrot when it lights upon 
1098 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
is difficult to untie. Since then the soul has become worldly: it can have no happiness 
unless this knot is untied. The Vedas and Puranas have suggested a number of devices 
for untying the knot; but the knot, far from being resolved, becomes harder and harder. 
The interior of the soul being utterly clouded with the darkness of ignorance, the knot 
cannot even be perceived; how, then, can it be untied? If God were to bring about such 
conditions (as are depicted ahead), even then the disentanglement of the knot is problematical. 
Suppose by the grace of Sri Hari the blessed cow in the shape of Sattvika (genuine) 
piety comes to abide in one’s heart and feeds on green herbage in the shape of Japa 
(muttering of prayers), austere penance, sacred observances, the Yamas or forms of 
self-restraint (viz., continence, veracity, non-violence, non-stealing and non-possession), 
the five Niyamas or positive virtues (viz., external and internal purity, contentment, self- 
study, self-discipline and self-surrender to God) and innumerable other blessed virtues 
and religious practices recommended by the Vedas. Milk begins to flow from her teats, 
let us hope, when she is united with her newly-born calf in the form of love. Quietism 
serves as the cord by which her hind legs are tied (in order to milk her); faith represents 
the pot in which the cow is milked; while a pure mind, which is at one’s beck and call, 
plays the role of a milker. Having thus drawn the milk in the shape of supreme righteousness 
one should boil it, brother, on the fire of desirelessness. When boiled, it should be cooled 
down with the breath of contentment and forbearance and congealed by mixing with it a 
little curd in the shape of fortitude and mind-control. The curd thus made should be 
churned in the earthen vase of cheerfulness with the churning-stick of reflection after 
fastening the stick to the host of self-restraint with the cord of truthful and agreeable 
words; and by this process of churning one should extract the pure, excellent and holy 
butter of dispassion. (1 — 8) 
it; and the bird, confused by the motion, fancies it is entangled in the string, though it is really loose and might 
fly away if it tried. For the monkey a large jar, with a narrow mouth, is sunk in the ground full of grain. The 
monkey puts in his hand and clutches a handful; but being unable to draw out his closed fist on account of the 
smallness of the jar’s mouth, he fancies himself caught, though if he stretches the palm of his hand he could 
extricate it immediately. 






* UTTARA-KANDA * 1099 
After kindling the fire of Yoga (concentration of mind) one’s past Karma, both good 
and evil, should be consigned to it as fuel, and the butter placed on it. When the scum 
in the form of worldly attachment is burnt, the ghee (clarified butter) that is left in the form 
of Gnosis should be cooled down by Buddhi (Reason). Having obtained this pure ghee 
(in the form of wisdom), Buddhi, which is of the nature of understanding, should fill with 
it the lamp of the Citta (reasoning faculty), and making a stand of even-mindedness set 
the lamp securely there. Extracting cotton in the form of the transcendental state out of 
the boll of the three states of conciousness (viz., waking, dream and dreamless sleep) 
and the three modes of Prakrti (viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) the same should be 
carded and fashioned into a strong wick. In this manner one should light the glorious 
lamp of immediate knowledge, by merely approaching which moths in the shape of vanity 
etc., are all consumed. (117 A — D) 

1100 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
The constant awareness that “I am the same (Brahma)” represents the most 
dazzling flame of the lamp. In this way when the bliss of Self-Realization sheds its bright 
lustre, the error of duality, the root of worldly existence, is dispersed and the infinite 
darkness of infatuation etc. — which forms the family of Avidya (Nescience) — disappears. 
Having thus procured a light, the Buddhi referred to above sits in the chamber of the 
heart to untie the ligature (that binds the Spirit with Matter). The soul can hope to attain 
its object only in the event of Buddhi succeeding in untying it. But when Maya, O king 
of the birds, finds her attempting to untie the knot, she creates many difficulties. She 
sends forth, brother, a number of Rddhis and Siddhis (riches and supernatural powers 
in their embodied forms), that try to excite her cupidity. By artifice, force or fraud they 
approach her and put off the light by fanning it with the end of their garment. If the Buddhi 
happens to be most sagacious, she refuses even to look at them considering them to 
be her enemies. If these impediments fail to distract her, the gods next proceed to create 
trouble. The various appertures of the body that locate the five senses are so many 
windows in the chamber of the heart, each of which is presided over by a god. Even as 
they find the gust of sensuality entering the chamber the gods wantonly throw the 
shutters of these appertures wide open. As soon as the blast penetrates the chamber 
of the heart the light of immediate knowledge gets extinguished. In this way while the 
ligature binding the Spirit with Matter remains untied, the light (of Self-Realization) also 
disappears and the understanding gets bewildered when buffetted by the blast of 
sensuality. Gnosis is welcome neither to the senses nor the gods presiding over them, 
who are ever fond of sensuous enjoyments. And the Buddhi too having been distracted 
by the blast of sensuality, who can light the lamp again as before? (1 — 8) 
 (When the light of wisdom is thus extinguished) the soul then goes again through the 
manifold agonies of transmigration. Sri Hari’s deluding potency, O lord of the winged creatures, 
is most difficult to cross: it cannot easily be crossed over. Gnosis is difficult to expound, 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 1101 
difficult to grasp and difficult to achive through practice. And if by chance one succeeds in 
attaining it, there are many impediments in the way of preserving it. (118 A-B) 

The path of wisdom is like the edge of a sword : one is apt to fall from it very soon, 
O king of the birds. He alone who successfully treads it attains to the supreme state of 
final emancipation. But this supreme state of final beatitude is most difficult to attain, so 
declare the saints as well as the Puranas, Vedas and Agamas (Tantras). By worshipping 
Sri Rama, my lord, the same beatitude comes unsolicited even against our will. Water 
cannot stay except on land notwithstanding our best efforts; even so, mark you, O king 
of the birds, the joy of final beatitude cannot stay apart from Devotion to Sri Hari. 
Realizing this, the wise devotees of Sri Hari spurn final emancipation and remain 
enamoured of Devotion. By practising Devotion ignorance, which is the root of 
metempsychosis, is eradicated without any effort or exertion, in the same way as we eat 
for our own gratification but the gastric fire digests the food so eaten (without any effort 
on our part). What fool is there who does not welcome such Devotion to Sri Hari, which 
is so easy and delightful at the same time? 

1102 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Chapter 215
The ocean of transmigration, O enemy of serpents, cannot be crossed without 
cultivating the same feeling of Sri Rama as a servant cherishes towards his master. 
Knowing this to be the established doctrine, adore the lotus feet of Sri Rama. The Lord 
of the Raghus can make the sentient inert and the inert sentient: the souls that adore such 
an omnipotent lord are blessed indeed. 
1103 
I have expounded at length the established doctrine relating to Gnosis; hear now the 
virtue of Devotion, which has been likened to a jewel. The beautiful wish-yielding gem of 
Devotion to Sri Rama is an embodiment of supreme effulgence, which sheds its radiance 
day and night, requiring neither a vessel nor clarified butter nor a wick (to light it). He in 
whose heart, O Garuda, such a jewel abides, is not haunted by poverty in the shade of 
infatuation. No blast of greed can ever extinguish this light, which dispels the overpowering 
gloom of ignorance and the swarms of moths (in the shape of vanity etc.,) keep away from 
it in a mood of frustration. Nay, vicious propensities like lust dare not approach him in 
whose heart the gem of Devotion abides. For him venom is transformed into ambrosia and 
enemies turn into friends; nobody can attain happiness without this jewel. Again, he is 
never attacked by the terrible mental diseases from which all living beings are grievously 
suffering. He in whose heart the gem of Devotion to Sri Rama abides cannot have the least 
woe even in a dream. They alone are paragons of wisdom in this world; who spare no pains 
to secure this gem. Although this jewel is manifest in the world, none can find it without the 
grace of Sri Rama. There are easy devices for finding it, but luckless souls attempt harder 
methods. The Vedas and Puranas represent holy mountains; and the stories of Sri Rama, 
the many glorious mines located in their midst. The saints are the expert minerologists and 
their penetrating intellect, the pickaxe; while spiritual wisdom and dispassion, Garuda, are 
the two eyes (surveying the mines). Any creature who looks for it with faith succeeds in 
discovering the gem of Devotion, a mine of all blessings. I have this conviction in my heart, 
my lord, that a servant of Sri Rama is greater than Sri Rama Himself. While Sri Rama is 
the ocean, the wise saints are like the rain-clouds; or (to use another metaphor) while Sri 
Hari is the sandal-tree, the saints represent the winds (that diffuse its perfume). Devotion 
to Sri Hari, which is so delightful, is the reward of all spiritual endeavours; none has ever 
secured it except through a saint. Realizing this whoever cultivates the fellowship of saints 
finds Devotion to Sri Rama easy of attainment, O king of the birds. (1 — 10) 
The Vedas are compared to the ocean (of milk); spiritual wisdom plays the role 
of Mount Mandara; while saints are the gods who churn out nectar in the form of the 
sacred legends; and Devotion represents its sweetness. Using Dispassion as a shield 




1104 

 (for self-defence) and slaying with the sword of wisdom enemies in the form of vanity, 
greed and infatuation, it is Devotion to Sri Hari that triumphs; ponder and realize this, 
O king of the birds. (120 A-B) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 
1105 
Garuda (the king of the birds) further submitted in loving tones : “If you cherish 
fondness for me, my gracious master, kindly recognize me as your servant, and answer 
me the following seven questions. Tell me, first of all, my most wise master; which form 
of all is the most difficult to obtain? Next consider and tell me briefly which is the greatest 
misery and which again is the highest pleasure. You know the essential characteristics 
of the saints and the evil-minded; therefore, describe their innate disposition. Also tell me 
which is the highest religious merit made known in the Vedas and which, again, is the 
1106 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
most terrible sin. Further tell me in unambiguous terms the diseases of the mind, 
omniscient as you are and richly endowed with compassion.” “Listen, dear Garuda, 
with reverence and rapt attention while I tell you briefly my views on these questions. 
There is no other form as good as the human body: every living creature — whether 
animate or inanimate — craves for it. It is the ladder that takes the soul either to hell or 
to heaven or again to final beatitude, and is the bestower of blessings in the form of 
wisdom, dispassion and Devotion. Men who fail to adore Sri Hari even after obtaining this 
body, and wallow in the basest pleasures of sense, throw away the philosopher’s stone 
from the palm of their hand and take bits of glass in exchange for the same. There is 
no misery in this world as terrible as poverty and no blessing as great as communion 
with saints. Beneficence in thought, word and deed is the innate disposition of saints, O 
king of the birds. The saints undergo suffering in the interest of others while impious 
wretches do so with a view to tormenting others. Tender-hearted saints, like the birch 
tree, submit to the greatest torture (even allow their skin to be peeled off) for the good 
of others; while the wicked, like the hemp, have their skin flayed off and perish in agony 
in order to be able to bind others (in the form of cords). Listen, O enemy of serpents: 
like the rat and the serpent, the wicked injure others without any gain to themselves. 
Having destroyed others’ prosperity they perish themselves, even as the hail dissolves 
after destroying the crops. The elevation of the wicked, like the rising of a comet — which 
is a detestable heavenly body — is a source of calamity to the world. The advancement 
of a saint, on the other hand, is ever conducive to joy, even as the rising of the sun and 
the moon brings delight to the whole universe. A vow of non-violence is the highest 
religious merit known to the Vedas; and there is no sin as grievous as speaking ill of 
others. A reviler of Lord Hara and his own preceptor takes the form of a frog (after his 
death) and his birth in that form is repeated a thousand times. A reviler of the Brahmanas, 
after suffering tortures in a number of hells, is born on earth in the form of a crow. Those 
conceited souls who revile the gods and the Vedas are cast into the hell known as 
Raurava. They who delight in vilifying the saints are reborn as owls, who love the night 
of error and for whom the sun of wisdom has set. The fools who censure all, are reborn 
as bats. Note now, dear Garuda, the diseases of the mind, from which everyone 
suffers. Infatuation is the root of all ailments and from these again arise many other 
troubles. Lust is a counterpart of wind and inordinate greed corresponds to an abundance 
of phlegm; while anger represents bile, which constantly burns the breast. Should all 
these three combine, there results what is known as Sannipata (a derangement of the 
aforesaid three humours of the body, causing fever which is of a dangerous type). The 
cravings for the manifold pleasures of the sense, so difficult to realize, are the various 
distempers, which are too numerous to name. The feeling of mineness corresponds 
to ringworms, envy represents itches while joy and grief correspond to a disease of the 
throat marked by an excessive enlargement of its glands. Grudging contemplation of 
others’ happiness represents consumption; while wickedness and perversity of soul 
correspond to leprosy. Egotism is a counterpart of the most painful gout; while hypocrisy, 
deceit, arrogance and pride correspond to the disease known as Dracontiasis (which is 
marked by the presence in the body of a parasite known as the guinea-worm). Thirst 
for enjoyment represents the most advanced type of dropsy; while the three types of 
craving (those for progeny, riches and honour) correspond to the violent quartan ague. 
Jealousy and thoughtlessness are the two types of fever. There are many more fell 
diseases, too numerous to mention. (1 — 19) 
* UTTARA-KANDA* 
1107 
People die even of one disease; while I have spoken of many incurable diseases 
which constantly torment the soul. How, then, can it find peace? There are sacred vows 
and religious observances and practices, austere penance, spiritual wisdom, sacrifices, 
Japa (muttering of prayers), charity and myriads of other remedies too; but the maladies 
just enumerated do not yield to these, O mount of Sri Hari. (121 A-B) 



1108 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
Thus every creature in this world is ailing and is further afflicted with grief and 
joy, fear, love and desolation. I have mentioned only a few diseases of the mind; although 
everyone is suffering from them, few are able to detect them. These wretches, the 
plague of mankind, diminish to a certain extent on being detected, but are not completely 
destroyed. Fed by the unwholesome diet of sensuality they sprout even in the mind 
of sages, to say nothing of poor mortals. All these ailments can no doubt be eradicated 
if by Sri Rama’s grace the following factors combine. There must be faith in the words 
of the physician in the form of a true preceptor; and the regimen is indifference to 
the pleasures of sense. Devotion to the Lord of the Raghus is the life-giving herb (to 
be used as a recipe); while a devout mind serves as the vehicle in which it is taken. 
By this process the ailments can certainly be eradicated; otherwise all our efforts will 
fail to get rid of them. The mind should be accounted as cured, my lord, only when 
the heart gathers strength in the form of dispassion, appetite in the shape of good 
resolutions grows stronger and stronger everyday and weakness in the form of sensual 
appetite goes. (Being thus rid of all diseases) when the soul bathes in the pure water 
of wisdom, the heart is saturated with Devotion to Sri Rama. Lord Siva, Brahma (the 
Unborn), Sanaka and his three brothers, Narada and other sages who are adept in 
the investigation of Brahma, all are of this opinion, O lord of the winged creatures, 
that one should cultivate devotion to the lotus-feet of Sri Rama. The Vedas and Puranas 
and all other scriptures declare that there can be no happiness without practising 
devotion to the Lord of the Raghus. It would be easier for the hair to grow on the 
shell of a tortoise, or for the progeny of a barren woman to slay anyone or for flowers 
of every description to appear in the air than for any creature to be happy even though 
hostile to Sri Hari. Sooner shall thirst be slaked by drinking of a mirage or horns sprout 
on a hare’s head or darkness efface the sun than a creature who has turned his face 
against Sri Rama find happiness. Sooner shall fire appear out of ice than an enemy 
of Sri Rama enjoy happiness. (1 — 10) 

* UTTARA-KANDA* 1109 

Chapter 216
Sooner shall butter be churned out of water or oil be extracted from sand than the 
ocean of worldly existence be crossed without adoring Sri Hari : this is a conclusion 
which cannot be set aside. The Lord can exalt a mosquito to the position of Brahma (the 
Creator) and degrade Brahma to a position lower than that of a mosquito. Realizing this, 
the wise discard all doubt and worship Sri Rama. (122 A-B) 
I tell You my considered view and my words can never be untrue: men who worship 
Sri Rama are able to cross the most turbulent ocean of mundane existence. (122 C) 
I have narrated, my lord, the incomparable story of Sri Hari according to my own 
lights, now briefly and now in detail. The conclusion of the Vedas, O enemy of serpents, 
is just this: forgetting all other duties Sri Rama alone should be adored. Who else is worth 
serving, if you renounce the almighty, Lord of the Raghus, who regards even a fool like 
me as His own. You are wisdom incarnate and have no infatuation; on the other hand, 





1110 


SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 


you have done me a unique favour, my lord, in that you asked me to repeat the most 
sacred story of Sri Rama, which delights the soul of sages like Suka, Sanaka and others, 
as well as of Lord Sambhu. The fellowship of saints is difficult to get in this world, be it 
for the twinkling of an eye or for half an hour even for once. Ponder in your heart, Garuda, 
and see for yourself whether I am competent in anyway to worship the Hero of Raghu’s 
line. The vilest of birds and impure in everyway as I was, the Lord has made me known 
as a purifier of the world. (1 — 4) 
Though vile in everyway, I am blessed, most blessed today, in that Sri Rama has 
acknowledged me as one of His own servants and therefore vouchsafed to me the 
fellowship of a saint (like you). My lord, I have spoken to the best of my ability and have 
concealed nothing. But the story of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus) is vast as an 
ocean: can anyone find the bottom of it ? (123 A-B) 
The wise Kakabhusundi rejoiced again and again as he pondered Sri Rama’s 
manifold virtues. That I should enjoy the grace of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus), 
whose glory is sung by the Vedas only in negative terms as “not that,” whose might, 




1111 

majesty and glory are unequalled and whose feet are worthy of adoration even to Lord 
Siva and Brahma (the Unborn, Creator) — betrays His supreme tenderness of heart. 
Nowhere have I heard of, much less seen, such a kind disposition: to whom shall I 
compare the Lord of the Raghus, O chief of the birds? Strivers and perfect souls, the 
liberated and the unworldly-minded, the seers and learned men, those knowing the 
secrets of Karma (duty) and those who have renounced all action, Yogis (mystics), and 
valiant heroes, great ascetics and wise men, pious souls and men of erudition and even 
men who have realized the Self — none of these can cross the ocean of mundane 
existence without adoring my lord, Sri Rama, to whom I bow again and again and yet 
again. I bow once more to that imperishable Lord by approaching whom for shelter even 
sinful souls like me get purified. (1 — 4) 
“He whose name is an unfailing remedy for the disease of birth and death and 
alleviates the three kinds of terrible pain — may that gracious Lord remain propitious 
both to me and to you.” On hearing Bhusundi’s blessed discourse and perceiving his 
devotion to Sri Rama’s feet, Garuda, who was now rid of all doubt, replied in endearing 
terms: — (124 A-B) 

1112 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
 “I have attained the object of my life now that I have listened to your discourse, 
imbued with the nectar of Devotion to Sri Rama’s feet. My love for Sri Rama’s feet has 
been renewed and the trouble created by Maya (the Lord’s deluding potency) has all 
ended. You have been a vessel to me, drifting as I was in the ocean of infatuation and 
have afforded me delight in various ways, my lord. I am, however, incapable of repaying 
my obligation to you and simply adore your feet again and again. You are fully satiated 
and a lover of Sri Rama; no one is so blessed as you, venerable sir. Saints, trees, rivers, 
mountains and the earth, all these operate for the good of others. The poets have 
declared the heart of a saint to be soft as butter; but they did not know what should be 
said. For, while butter melts only when the same is heated on fire, the holy saints melt 
at the suffering of others. My life and birth into this world have both been rewarded and 
by your grace all my doubts have fled. Ever regard me as your own servant.” Again and 
again did the chief of the birds speak thus, O Uma. (1 — 5) 
Lovingly bowing his head at Kakabhusundi’s feet, Garuda, who was so resolute 
of purpose, then flew away to Vaikuntha (the divine abode of Lord Visnu), with an image 
of Sri Rama (the Hero of Raghu’s line) imprinted on his heart. Girija, there is no gain so 
valuable as the fellowship of saints; the same, however, cannot be had without the grace 
of Sri Hari : so declare the Vedas and Puranas. (125 A-B) 

1113 
Chapter 217
I have thus repeated the most sacred narrative, by hearing which one is freed 
from the bonds of worldly existence and comes to have devotion to the lotus-feet of 
the All-merciful Sri Rama, who is a wish-yielding tree to the suppliant. Again, they who 
listen to this narrative attentively are absolved of sins committed with the mind, speech 
or body. Pilgrimages to sacred places and other means of self-purification, perfection 
in Yoga (mind-control), dispassion and wisdom, sacred rites and religious practices, 
vows and charitable acts of various kinds, self-denial and self-control, Japa (muttering 
of prayers) and austere penance, performing manifold sacrifices, compassion to all living 
beings, ministering to the Brahmanas and one’s preceptor, learning, modesty, right 
judgment and nobility of mind and character, in short, all the expedients extolled in 
the Vedas, Bhavanl, have but one reward — Devotion to Sri Hari. Such devotion to the 
Lord of the Raghus as has been glorified in the Vedas is attained to by some rare 
soul by the grace of Sri Rama Himself. (1 — 4) 
Although such devotion to Sri Hari is scarce attainable even by the sages, it can 
be easily attained by men who constantly listen to this story with faith. (126) 
1114 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
He alone is omniscient and accomplished, he alone is wise, he alone is an 
ornament of the globe, learned and munificent, he alone is pious and he the saviour of 
his race, whose mind is devoted to the feet of Sri Rama. He alone is perfect in correct 
behaviour and most sagacious, he alone has thoroughly grasped the conclusion of the 
Vedas, and he alone is a seer, a man of erudition, and staunch in battle, who adores the 
Hero of Raghu’s line in a guileless spirit. Blessed is the land where flows the celestial 
stream (the Gariga); blessed the wife who observes a vow of fidelity to her husband. 
Blessed is the monarch who administers justice; blessed the Brahmana who swerves 
not from his duty. Blessed is the wealth which is used to the best advantage;* blessed 
is the intellect and ripe too, which is devoted to pious acts. Blessed is the hour which 
is spent in communion with saints; blessed the birth in which one practises unceasing 
devotion to the twice-born (the Brahmanas). (1 — 4) 
Listen, Uma : blessed is the family, worthy of adoration for the whole world and 
most hallowed too, in which is born an humble devotee of the illustrious Rama (the Hero 
of Raghu’s line). (127) 
* Wealth invariably meets with one of the following three fates: it is either devoted to some charitable 
purpose, squandered away on luxury and enjoyment or lost. Evidently the first of these is the best use of it. The 
wealth of the miser who neither devotes it to the service of the needy, nor spends it on his own comforts meets 
with the third, which is the worst fate. 
 1115 
I have told you this narrative according to my own lights, although at first I kept 
it secret. I saw excessive fondness for the same in your heart and then I narrated to you 
the story of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). This story, however, should not be 
repeated to a perverse knave, who does not listen attentively to the story of Sri Hari; nor 
should it be recited to a greedy, irascible or lustful man who worship not the Lord of all 
animate and inanimate creation. It should never be repeated to a Brahmana-hater, be he 
a monarch as great as Indra (the lord of the celestials). They alone are qualified to hear 
Sri Rama’s narrative, who are extremely fond of communion with holy men. They alone 
are fit to hear it, who are devoted to the feet of their preceptor, and are lovers of propriety 
and votaries of the Brahmanas. The story affords special delight to them who hold the 
graceful Lord of the Raghus dear as life. (1 — 4) 
He who seeks devotion to the feet of Sri Rama or to enjoy the state of eternal 
bliss should fondly drink in this story with the cups of his ears. (128) 
I have narrated, Girija, the story of Sri Rama, which wipes out the sins of the Kali 
age and removes the impurities of the mind. The narrative of Sri Rama, as is declared 
by the Vedas and the seers, is a life-giving herb to cure the disease of birth and death. 
It has seven beautiful stairs, which are so many roads as it were leading to the goal of 
Devotion to the Lord of the Raghus. He alone who enjoys the utmost grace of Sri Hari 
can set his foot on this road (the road to Devotion). Men who sing this story in a guileless 
spirit attain the object of their soul’s desire. Nay, they who repeat or listen to it or even 
approve of its recitation cross the ocean of mundane existence as they would the print 

1116 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
of a cow’s hoof. Girija (Daughter of the mountain-king) was greatly delighted at heart to 
hear the whole narrative and replied in pleasing tones : “By the grace of my 
lord (Yourself) my doubts have disappeared and my devotion to Sri Rama’s feet has 
been renovated. (1 — 4) 
 “By your blessing, O Lord of the universe, I have now attained the object of my 
life. Unswerving devotion to Sri Rama has sprung in my heart and all my afflictions 
have ended.” (129) 

This blessed dialogue between Lord Sambhu and Goddess Uma begets joy and 
lifts the gloom of depression. It puts an end to transmigration, disperses doubt, delights 
the devotees and is dear to the saints. To the worshippers of Sri Rama, nothing is 
so dear as this (narrative of Sri Rama). By the grace of Sri Rama (the Lord of the 
Raghus) Himself I have sung to the best of my ability this sacred and charming story. 
In this age of Kali no other discipline is of any avail — neither Yoga (mind-control) nor 
sacrifices, nor Japa (muttering of prayers) not austere penance nor any sacred vows 
nor ritual : Rama alone should be remembered, Rama alone should be glorified; and 
it is the catalogue of Rama’s virtues alone that should be given ear to. Forswearing 
perversity, my soul, adore Him whose great vow it is to sanctify the fallen, as is declared 
by seers and saints, the Vedas and Puranas : who has not secured redemption by 
worshipping Sri Rama? (1 — 4) 




* UTTARA-KANDA* 1117 
Listen, my stupid soul : who has not been saved by adoring Sri Rama, the purifier 
of the fallen? The harlot (Pihgala), Ajamila, the hunter (Valmiki), the vulture (Jatayu), the 
elephant and many other wretches have been delivered by Him. Even Abhiras (a hilly 
tribe inhabiting the south-west coast in the ancient times), Yavanas, Kiratas (Bhilas), 
Khasas (another hill-tribe found in Assam), Candalas (the pariah) and others, the very 
embodiments of grievous sin, are hallowed by merely uttering Your name even once : 
I adore You, O Rama. Men who repeat to others, listen to (when repeated by others) 
or chant alone this narrative of Sri Rama (the Ornament of Raghu’s race) thereby wipe 
out the sins that are incident to the Kali age as well as the impurities of their soul, and 
ascend to the Abode of Sri Rama without any difficulty. Nay the Chief of the Raghus 
1118 
SRI RAMACARITAMANASA 
cures the perversities, caused by the fivefold* ignorance, of those men who treasure up 
in their heart even a few Caupais (small four-footed verses) of this narrative that appeal 
to them as most charming. If there is anyone who is all-beautiful, all-wise and all-merciful 
and who is fond of the forlorn, it is Rama and Rama alone; who else can compare with 
Him as a disinterested friend and a bestower of eternal bliss? Nowhere can we find a 
lord like Sri Rama, by an iota of whose grace even the dull-witted Tulasidasa has found 
supreme peace. (1 — 3) 

There is no one so miserable as I nor such a friend of the miserable as You, O Hero 
of Raghu’s line ! Realizing this, O Jewel of Raghu’s race, take away my fear of transmigration, 
which is so terrible. May You be ever so dear to me, Rama, as woman is dear to a lustful 
man, and as lucre is dear to the greedy, O Lord of the Raghus. (130 A-B) 
* The fivefold ignorance has been characterized as mistaking (1) the unreal for real, (2) the ephemeral 
for the eternal, (3) the painful as pleasurable, (4) the impure for pure and (5) that which is worth discarding for 
something worth acquiring. 
1119 
The same mysterious “Manasa-Ramayana” (the story of Sri Rama figuratively 
spoken of as a Manasa lake) which was composed of yore by the blessed Lord Sambhu, 
the best of all poets, with the object of developing unceasing devotion to the lotus-feet 
of the all-beautiful Sri Rama, has been likewise rendered into the language of cammar 
by Tulasidasa for dispersing the gloom of his heart, cognizing the fact that it is devoted 
to the Name of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus). This glorious, holy, purifying, blessed 
and most limpid Manasa lake of Sri Rama’s exploits ever begets happiness; nay, it 
bestows both wisdom and Devotion, wipes out delusion, infatuation and impurity and is 
brimful with the water of love. Men who devoutly take a plunge into it are never scorched 
with the burning rays of the sun of worldly illusion. (1-2) 
Thus ends the seventh descent into the Manasa lake of SrT Rama’s 
exploits, that eradicates all the impurities of the Kali age. 




